# Bullet Block Experiment Result

Источник: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=N8HrMZB6_dU
Канал: Veritasium

All right, let's watch it. Hopefully I'm not horribly wrong. Derek's giggling to himself right now. Okay, you have made your prediction. Now it's time to find out which block went higher. The one that shot off center or the one that shot right into the center of mass. Okay, we're just getting set for shooting straight into the block. How you feeling about this one, Dave? I think this is the one. I really do. Okay, range is going hot in three, two, one. [Applause] We've moved this block. So now the gun is actually firing into the right side of the block. So presumably one imagines that the block will spin anticlockwise. 3 2 1 [Applause] [Music] Now, check out the high-speed footage. You can clearly see that both blocks go to the exact same height, even though one is rotating. And that's a bit strange because they were both hit by the same type of bullet from the same rifle. So, presumably, it had the same kinetic energy. And they both go the same height, so they both have the same gravitational potential energy. But one is rotating and so it has that additional rotational energy. So one block has more energy than the other block. I don't know if I buy that, Dr. Mueller. Yeah, talk talk to me. Yeah. I mean, so you're telling me you just created energy? Not necessarily created energy. So So what do you think in there? Uh I am potentially surprised. Is it the same height? Speed footage. Obviously, I'm wrong. They they went up to the same height, which is incredibly confusing to me. Why is that confusing? Because that doesn't Where's that extra energy coming from? But the fact is that one block clearly does have more energy. You think about them both at the top. One's spinning, one's not. They basically have identical gravitational energy, but one does have additional rotational energy. How is that possible? And why is it happening? No. Explain it to me. I don't want to give you the answer right away. I love it when you say that. I don't want to give you the answer. That means you don't know. So, if you can make me a video response, I would love that. Or if you just want to post your idea in the comments below, that would be great. And I will reveal the correct answer next week. So, subscribe to the channel if you haven't already, and you'll find out in a week's time after I have time to pour over the footage and consult a very smart man in the subject. That's what you get to say. [Applause] Yeah. [Music] [Applause]
