# How easy is it to steal $10,000 from a locked phone?

Источник: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PPJ6NJkmDAo
Канал: Veritasium

I'm here with MKBHD and we're going to try to steal $10,000 from his locked iPhone. I really hope it doesn't work. I really hope it doesn't work. I'm going to get you to put that phone down on top of this device. Okay. >> Just Just put it down. That's just Put it on like a All right. I feel like I'm a bit of a magician, but I'm like I haven't changed anything, right? Okay. Yeah. It's It's still locked. >> It's locked. Nothing else. Yeah. It's just a regular payment terminal. Nothing Nothing weird about that. >> Seen these. We'll start with a little like maybe 100 No, maybe $5. Let's start something like Yeah, five. Five. Start five. That sounds great. Yeah, five bucks. >> [snorts] >> Do you think that we can take like will we be able to get this out of your phone? I hope not, but I kind of feel like you will. >> [laughter] >> Let's Let's see. So, now I'm going to charge $5 on this device. Your phone's still locked, right? Yep. I I haven't done anything. It's like a David Blaine. It's like the the nerdiest David Blaine. >> [laughter] >> Sweet. So, let's try a tap. We'll go. What just happened on my phone? Approve Whoa, whoa. Approved. So, okay. I heard something happen on my phone while you tap this on this. Yes. >> [laughter] >> We got a little receipt for you. Uh credit verified on device $5. So, I'm going to check my phone. Uh oh, I have a new $5 charge. >> [laughter] >> And it's timestamped right now. I don't like that at all. >> [laughter] >> So, that's concerning. [music] Oh, so my phone had to be on this thing. >> Yes. Did it have to be on this thing or like near it, I guess? So, the way Whoa. I could explain how it works, but maybe before that $5 is not very much. Yeah. Do we want to try upping it a bit? I I'm going to enter a slightly larger amount. Careful. Careful with that. Careful. Careful. That's a lot of zeros. Careful with that. Oh my god. Okay. Do you Do you even think it's possible first firstly? $10,000. I mean, the credit the limit on the card is above that. I don't know if Apple Pay will let you do that. The question is also are you used to spending this amount of money on this card, you know? >> Not from my phone. This is like a big screen activity. Like $10,000 [laughter] $10,000 purchase. So, I got to be checking everything. So, uh yeah, no, this would be unusual. Let's see it. Let's see if it works. Okay, I'm going to do it again. Okay. We're going to just All you All we got to do again, put your phone locked >> Phone on this device. Locked on that device. Yes, exactly. And [music] Okay, we're going to start the script again. Okay. Mhm. No, it's just just [laughter] green approved. Print that out. Print that. Oh, we did that. That is crazy. Oh my god. So So, uh yeah, I'm I'm going to need that back. Yeah. [laughter] For sure, I'm going to need that back. But also, did that just Yeah, wow. It worked. $10,000. All right. I believe you. I definitely believe you. Uh How do we get this back? We do like a little Venmo or like PayPal >> Do we give it back, though? Reverse [laughter] the transaction? I don't even know. Do I call my That's crazy. >> Yeah, exactly. You can keep this if you want to Yeah. get it framed. A receipt [laughter] of the of the damage. I never unlocked my phone. I never put in the password. I never did what I would normally do to verify a transaction [music] on my phone. Yes. It just happened to be on top of that. So, how did we do it? Well, we teamed up with two cybersecurity experts, Professors Ioana Boren and Tom Chothia, and we went to visit them at the University of Surrey, where they ran us through a unique hack that they developed to bypass a phone's lock screen and then to drain funds from inside its mobile wallet. Without unlocking my phone is the is the real magic part. That's crazy. And the craziest thing of all is that this hack was made public back in 2021. So, people have known that it's possible to take money from locked phones in this way for 5 years. So, what kind of amounts does this The only limit is how much someone has in their [music] bank account. Yet, the loophole still hasn't been fixed. So, how does it work? Well, whenever you use tap to pay, your phone and the reader exchange information about the transaction. But they send this information through the air by a shared magnetic field. So, we can intercept the communication and alter it. All we need to do is to insert our own devices in between the phone and the reader. >> [music] >> First, we tap Marques's phone against this. It's an NFC device called a Proxmark. To Marques's phone, the Proxmark looks like a typical card reader. >> [music] >> So, it happily sends over its transaction data. That Proxmark then sends that data straight to our laptop, where we run a Python script to modify it. >> [music] >> Next, the laptop sends the data to our burner phone, which I tap on the actual card reader. To the reader, my phone looks just like Marques's. So, both Marques's phone and the card reader think they're talking directly to each other. When in fact, all their communication goes through our series of devices. This is a classic man-in-the-middle attack. Now, getting in the middle to intercept the data is actually the easy part. The hard part is what you need to do to that data to trick the phone and the reader into authorizing the transaction. See, to actually steal money using this attack, you have to get past three layers of defense on both systems. And to do that, we have to tell both three lies, two to the phone and one to the reader. So, the first layer of defense is the simplest. The phone is locked. And in an ordinary transaction, you have to unlock your phone to pay. But this is no ordinary transaction. So, you know, if you ever go to the subway, there's a feature that Apple's created where, you know, when you walk through, they don't want a bunch of people lining up and, you know, having to unlock their face and, you know, maybe they're wearing a coat and glasses and stuff. >> express [music] transit mode. Apple introduced express transit mode in 2019 to let you make transit transactions without having to unlock your phone. The way this works is that the payment terminals on the subway or on the bus broadcast a message that identifies them as a transit terminal. Then, when you tap your phone to pay, it looks for whatever card is in the transit slot of its mobile wallet and it pays without needing to unlock. This is super convenient, but we can also abuse it. We found out how this worked by going to London Underground with our laptops and our equipment and actually scanning the signals and seeing what the gate was saying to the phone. >> [music] >> And that's how we discovered this code the gate sent, which unlocked the phone. We used the Proxmark to broadcast that same [music] code, which fools Marques's phone into thinking that it's a transit reader. So, when we tap Marques's phone against the Proxmark, it's now expecting to receive another message with the details about the transit transaction. Here's what that message would typically look like in binary code. Each of these bits carries important information about the transaction. Now, the important part of this message for us is this bit. An authentic transit transaction would have a one right here. This tells the phone that the reader may be offline, like if it's underground on the subway, in which case the phone would need to send an extra layer of authentication. So, when Marques's phone receives the transaction request from what it thinks is a transit reader, it's going to be expecting that value to be set to one. But in reality, the device sending the request is our retail reader. And this reader is online, which means that that bit is currently set to zero. Therefore, to trick the phone into accepting the transaction, we intercept the message from the reader, pass it through our computer, and we change that zero to a one. So, by the time the message gets to Marques's phone, it looks like a transit transaction. As this communicates through our computer, we're we're convincing the phone that it is in fact talking to a transit terminal. But now there's a second line of defense we need to break. With this first lie, we bypass the need to unlock the phone, and we can now trick it into making small payments of a few dollars, kind you'd expect on the subway. But if we suddenly went and asked the phone for $10,000, well, its guard would go way back up. After all, it's pretty unusual for a transit reader to ask for such a large amount of money. >> [music] >> So, this activates a second layer of defense, customer verification. On contactless payments like this, there are two categories of transaction. We got high value and low [music] value. Any transaction that's classified as high value requires additional verification from the customer. For example, in the UK, most banks require a PIN or fingerprint or facial recognition for any transaction over £100. So, for us to get this $10,000 payment through without customer verification, we need to trick the phone into thinking that $10,000 is in fact a low value transaction. And that's actually surprisingly simple. That's because to determine whether the transaction is high value, Marques's phone doesn't actually look at the numerical value of $10,000. [music] It just looks at another single bit of information in the transaction data. A one here means high value and zero means low. The reason for this is that the boundary between high and low value varies from country to country. And of course, different countries operate in different currencies. So, a simple label allows the flexibility to deal with these [music] variations, and it allows the limits to be changed without the banks needing to issue new cards. So, all we need to do is intercept the message from the reader, flip that bit to a zero, and then the phone will believe that this transaction is low value, even though it's for $10,000. Then, when the phone receives our request for a $10,000 transaction, it doesn't ask for customer verification. It just goes ahead and authorizes the transaction. Now, you might be asking, "Why is this data so easy to tamper with?" And we'll get to that in just a minute. But, we have one final security check to overcome. See, with these first two lies, we bypassed unlocking the phone, and then tricked it into making a high-value transaction without asking for verification. So, the phone is fully convinced, and it's ready to make the payment. But, we still need to convince the reader that the transaction is valid. And this is where our third lie comes in. When Marques's phone replies, it says it's approved the $10,000 transaction, but it also says that it hasn't asked for customer verification. No PIN, no fingerprint, no facial recognition. But, if the reader sees this, it'll reject the transaction, because it knows that the $10,000 payment it originally asked for is high value, and should therefore require customer verification. So, now we need to trick the reader into thinking that the customer has verified the payment. So, we intercept the response from Marques's phone, and look for the bit of information that says customer verification hasn't been done. Then, we change it to say that the payment has been verified by flipping this zero to a one. Now, the reader's happy. It forwards the information onto the bank, and the bank authorizes the payment. After all, it sees a transaction that's been verified by the customer on their device. Green, approved. That is crazy. Verified on device? Yeah, verified. You didn't verify it. Right. So, why isn't all this information encrypted? That would make it impossible to secretly tamper with. Well, the way the phone and reader communicate has to be compatible with thousands of different devices, which would be impossible to update all in one go. So, for that reason, the information we've looked at so far is just sent across unencrypted. Even still, phones, readers, and banks all have checks in place to make sure an attack like [music] this can't happen. And normally, it can't. Except if you happen to use a specific type of phone [music] and a specific type of card. Because when you combine them in this particular scenario, they create a loophole. So, our hack relied on a specific phone and credit card combination. We also used a sophisticated method developed by cybersecurity experts. But, hackers or scammers online, well, they don't need to be that smart. Often, they can just buy information to target you. When I started working at Veritasium, I was on a work trip to go meet Derek for the first time, and I got an email from somebody who was saying he was Derek asking for my phone number. That made a ton of sense. I was leaving the airport, so I just responded by sending my phone number. I immediately was like, "Wait, let me look at that." I checked the email, not Derek. Of course, for the next few months, I was just getting scam call after scam call. That's one way they can get you. I felt like an idiot, but it's not just scam calls like that. I've also had that feeling after news of a major data breach. I wondered whether me using some website has led to my personal information being exposed somewhere without me even knowing about it. But, you can protect your personal info with today's sponsor, Incogni. See, whenever scammers purchase your email, phone number, and even your home address from data brokers, Incogni automates the grueling process of requesting that these data brokers delete your information. Okay, so I've had this since June 2025, and since then, we've had 94 different removal requests. And I really like how you can track the progress in this dashboard here. They've estimated that that's saved me 70 hours and 30 minutes of my own time if I were to reach out to these people myself. And with Incogni's new custom removal feature in their unlimited plans, you can point to any specific site where your information is visible. Then, one of their privacy agents will take care of the rest. So, to take your data off the market today, go to incogni.com/veritasium, and then use code Veritasium for 60% off. You can click the link below, or you can scan this QR code to claim that 60% off and get your personal data off the market. I want to thank Incogni for sponsoring this video about taking money from Marques Brownlee. And now, let's get back to that thing. >> [laughter] >> So, which combination of card and phone make this hack possible? Firstly, the phone has to be an iPhone. As we saw earlier, when an iPhone is deciding whether to ask for customer verification, it doesn't look at the numerical value of the transaction. It only looks at the high value or low value label provided by the reader. But, other phones don't work that way. >> [music] >> For example, when a Samsung phone goes into transit mode, it doesn't rely on this low value label from the reader. It looks at the actual numerical value of the transaction, and it only accepts a payment of zero dollars. Then, it relies on the transport provider to count up all the times you've used the subway, and then to send you a bill at the end of the day. So, if a Samsung phone saw a transit terminal trying to charge you $10,000 for a single tap, >> [music] >> it would immediately reject it. But, it's not just Apple's transit mode that makes this hack possible. You've got to have one specific type of card in the transit slot. It was [music] truly a design feature that was introduced by the way you mixed Apple and Visa. And the reason that this works with a Visa card, but wouldn't, let's say, a MasterCard, comes down to the different processes they use to verify transactions. So, what is it about Visa's verification process that makes this hack possible? In a previous video, we saw that any card transaction relies on a secret cryptographic key shared by the card and the bank. When you tap the card or phone onto a reader, the reader sends across a long string of transaction details. The card then applies its secret key to garble that message into a unique code for the transaction. The card sends this to the reader, which the reader forwards onto the bank along with the raw transaction details. The bank then applies its own secret key to the raw data as well. And if the output matches the one from the card, the bank authorizes the transaction. This is called symmetric cryptography, since the card and the bank use the same secret key. [music] And this step is required in all transactions, no matter whether you have a Visa, a MasterCard, or something else. But, there's actually another layer of security, which MasterCard uses in all of its transactions, but in this particular case, Visa doesn't. This layer of security is not between the card and the bank, but between the card and the reader. And it's at this step where MasterCard thwarts our attack. This second step relies on asymmetric cryptography, so-called because it uses two different keys, a private key for the card and a public key for the reader. It starts with the reader sending across the transaction details to the card, just like before. The card then uses its private key to garble that message into another long string of digits. >> [music] >> This is the card's digital signature for the transaction. The card sends this signature back to the reader along with the public key, which the reader then uses to verify that the signature came from that specific card for this specific transaction. To illustrate how this works, let's consider a simple example. The private key and public key both have two components. N is a shared number. In this case, let's say 55. D is the card's private number. Let's say seven. And E is the public number. Let's say three. Now, when the reader sends across the raw transaction data, it represents it as one long number. But, for simplicity, we'll use a much smaller one. Let's say two. To sign for the transaction, the card or the phone raises the transaction number, in this case two, to the power of its private number. So, we get 128. And then, divides this by the shared number, 128 [music] over 55, which leaves a remainder of 18. And this is the card signature, 18, which it sends onto the reader. Now, the reader needs to know whether the transaction is valid. So, it takes the card signature and raises it to the power of the public number. Then, it takes the remainder when you divide by the shared number, 55, and you get two. This matches the original transaction data the reader sent to the card. The reason this works is that the private and public numbers are specifically chosen >> [music] >> so that when combined with the shared number, the public key effectively reverses the operation of the private key. And this allows the reader to verify that the card signature is valid without ever having seen its private number. This is based on a type of cryptography called RSA. In reality, the numbers involved are much larger, >> [music] >> but that makes it incredibly secure, because that makes it virtually impossible to reverse engineer the card's private key. And it also means that even a one-digit change in the transaction data will produce a different result when the reader checks the phone signature, [music] in which case, the reader won't approve the transaction. This is a problem because we've modified the data. The reader's expecting a signature for a high-value retail transaction, but we intercepted the communication, so the phone signature is actually for low-value transit transaction. [music] This wouldn't pass the asymmetric signature check. But, while MasterCard always requires this asymmetric verification, which would spot our [music] hack, Visa doesn't. They only require this signature in certain situations, like when the reader's offline. For example, when you're underground with no signal, there's no way for the reader to communicate with the bank for that first layer of symmetric cryptography, at least not until it comes back online. So, during our attack, we make sure the reader is online the whole time. That way, it doesn't bother using the asymmetric layer of security, which contains the signature that would unravel our lies. But, the funny thing is, we've tricked the phone into thinking it's interacting with the transit reader, and transit transactions are one of those times where Visa does require the asymmetric signature, since the reader could be underground on the subway and therefore offline. >> [music] >> So, the phone actually does send across its signature to the reader. But, the reader doesn't check it because in reality, the reader's online. So, instead it just relies on that first layer of security with the bank. Even though if it did check the phone signature, it would have all the evidence it needed to stop the hack. So, yeah. There you go. Makes sense that it's that sophisticated cuz it shouldn't be that easy, but that's still seemed way too easy. And Marquez was not the only victim. I thought it was only fair that I first tried it out on myself. >> [music] [laughter] >> Yeah, here. Your souvenir from the UK from Tom and me. Oh, what a lovely receipt for this this theft. >> [laughter] >> And then I got another victim with a bit of a bigger budget. Our channel has a like CFO basically who lives very nearby. What we're doing is we're setting it to be your transit card. Okay. So, that means that if if you're in London you have to use the tube, it'll take money from this [music] card. Something just happened. Yeah. >> [laughter] >> How do you feel about that? >> Oh my goodness, mate. Oh my god. >> [laughter] >> There you go. We were just going to meet for a drink. That that's what, you know, that was the agreement. In the real world, say you had your phone in your pocket. Yeah. I would walk by you Yeah. doing this and Tom would have this in a shop and pay. The easiest way for this to actually be a crime would be a stolen iPhone. Sure. And then someone goes and spends thousands of pounds. So, yeah. You can You could buy a car with this. Jeez. Yeah. Yeah, theoretically. Jeez. Yeah. Wow. I guess from your perspective you've revealed all this information publicly and you're telling us we're walking in through it in great detail. How does it How do we stop people from using this for Or it Can we stop people? Like Who's Who's responsibility is is it to stop this? Oh, whose responsibility is it is an interesting question. But, you can stop it by turning transit mode off. Or not turn it off and not have a Visa card in transit mode on an Apple. Yeah. And you do need to be careful because as soon as you have a suitable card in your Apple Wallet, Express Transit mode is turned on by default. This hack was first made public way back in 2021 after the professors had informed Apple and Visa privately. >> [music] >> And to get to the bottom of why it's still possible, we reached out to Apple and they didn't agree to an interview, but here's what they said. This is a concern with the Visa system, but Visa does not believe this kind of fraud is likely to take place in the real world. Visa has made it clear that their card holders are protected by Visa's zero liability policy. This is exactly the same as their position when the hack was first made public back in 2021. So, it seems like Apple are basically saying, "Well, this is a Visa problem." So, we went and asked Visa what they thought. I think this specific vulnerability is likely within a controlled setting, very unlikely from a scaled real world setting. And then kind of the last point is from a consumer perspective [music] is that in the cases where this is successful, they have the ability to dispute this transaction and get their refund returned to them. I I think that's fair. You're saying it's not entirely scalable and then even if it does happen, we'll give you your money back. Like that's that's a great It's a great stance. I still think though a lot of people and I think our audience would really want to hear that you're actually making the technical changes to stop this from ever happening again. Cuz when you think about it from a scale perspective and whether [music] the network level defenses that we have are effective in making sure that this type of vulnerability is isolated, we believe it is effective because if it wasn't, you would hear a lot more data about how this is an issue and it simply isn't. The The point that I'm making is that you're never going to be able to [music] completely eradicate any specific type of fraud cuz it's going to exist, [music] right? >> Yes. What I'm saying is that we have the right detections in place to ensure that this type of fraud is not endemic. >> [music] >> Would it not be even better to just say this type of fraud is not possible? Why not just say it's not probable? Why not just totally get rid of it by implementing an actual technical change? If you think about for every $100 of spend that occurs on card payments, 10 cents of that is lost to fraud. So, every $100, 10 cents. If you look at in-person transactions, >> [music] >> which is what kind of this topic is really much more related to, that number goes down to 2 cents for every $100 of fraud that's being made. So, I've been thinking about this hack and [music] it reminds me a lot about people who are afraid of flying. Statistically, you're a lot more likely to crash on the drive to the airport than you are in the air. So, I do understand Visa's argument generally. Compared to other kinds of fraud, this is just a drop in the ocean. But, airlines don't accept a small number of crashes each year as an inevitable cost of doing business. [music] No, anytime there's a crash, they analyze it meticulously. Then they do everything in their power to make sure that it's never going to happen again. Visa says that they'll get you your money back [music] and that's great. But, you've still got to notice the charge, dispute it, >> [music] >> and then wait. Imagine waking up to see $10,000 gone from your account. That's money for rent, insurance, car payment, or a medical bill. Even if the refund does come, the stress before is going to be very real. So, for me the question is whether just saying they're going to refund it after the fact is good enough or when a system touches the lives of so many people, should we expect better? Okay, yeah. That's the that's the whole demo. I will now give you your money back. >> [laughter] >> Yes. Okay, we got the
