# Spinning Tube Trick Explained

Источник: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7rAiZR_zasg
Канал: Veritasium

[Applause] [Music] So, how does the spinning tube trick work? Well, a lot of you identified that the tube is rotating about its long axis and it's also rotating horizontally about its middle. But how does that allow us to see one symbol and not the other? Well, let's say we press on the X. If you press down on the X, it'll actually be spinning backwards with respect to the motion of the tube in its horizontal rotation. So when the X turns to face upwards, it will actually be spinning backwards with the tube while the tube is moving forwards. So the velocity of the X will be reduced by its spin in the backwards direction. On the other hand, the O is spinning in the same direction as the tube is moving, which means that the O will move across your field of view much faster and therefore it'll be much more difficult to see. I want to say a big thank you for all of those who submitted a video response. I really, really enjoyed watching your work. Baby. [Music] Okay. Right on the center of gravity. And so I had to rethink that. That's smart. He's got a smoother surface there. I like that. Oh, this is my favorite part. Spin that way in both direction. All right. It would spin the O spin back towards me. So the side touching the ground travels less distance than the part not touching the ground, causing it to spin slightly slower. The outer part takes longer to do. 72 hours. And my dad as you can with Bruce. That's amazing. And here's our tools. There's dedication. I would also like to thank everyone who posted in the comments their suggestions. I think Grumble 45 was the first one to post a correct solution. So, uh, well done to you. And this just shows me that we need some more complicated physics puzzles for you guys to try to solve. So, I'll see what I can do and I'll post one up shortly. Until then, keep spinning those tubes. [Music]
