# The First Meeting of EDUtubers! ft. CGPGrey, Vsauce, Smarter Every Day, Numberphile +more

Источник: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SnrdqCQuwK8
Канал: Veritasium

Hey, Veritasium. Michael from Vsauce here and we're going to ask some important questions. Let's find some random bystanders. How about you? Yes. I don't believe you're scientifically literate. Okay. If a tomato is a fruit, does that mean ketchup is a smoothie? So, can you name any of the cities in the Indis Valley civilization? Are we talking about like Cairo? No. Cairo would not qualify as one of the cities in in the indis valley civilization. Cairo. Cairo. This is Brady Haron from Periodic Videos and 60 Symbols and Bible Decks and Deep Sky Videos and Number File and Nottingham Science and Food Ski. All right. And I'm Derek from Veritasium. Well, you've only got one channel. I know. You call yourself a YouTuber by heart. Uh, you want to ask me a question? Triangle. Um, that's not a question. Triangle. Um, in what year did the French Revolution begin? 1772. You had the the first two numbers were awesome. We have a Veritassium exclusive right now. We're going to show you the first unauthorized picture of CGP Gray, who's standing here right next to me. Here's a question for Oh. Hang on. He was here a minute ago. Okay. So, what I was thinking I might have you uh try to calculate here is some fineman diagrams and curved spacetime. But to start off with something a bit easier, uh I think we should start off with the Christophal symbol for the short metric. Um and in case you've forgotten, I've written it. I've even written the metric. No, I know what I know it is. I don't need to show me. I know. You have something on your face. Triangle, triangle, triangle, triangle, triangle, triangle, triangle, triangle, triangle, triangle, triangle, triangle. I am actually quite concerned about what you did to my face. Right. So, this is CGP Grey and Veritassium at the Brain STEM conference here in Canada and it's been a great couple of days. You going to come visit me, Derek? Definitely. I've always wanted to visit Great Britain. I mean, the United Kingdom, England, great. The British Isles. Great. Yeah, I look forward to it. Going through US customs in like an hour. I was expecting like a triangle, but this is feeling like lots of triangles. Well, they they are happier in groups, right? Like they're like sheep. They get sad and lonely by themselves. So, we're in the Corolla. I don't I just look like there's like the Menanite farms out there. Water. If this car crashes right now, like all of science on YouTube is going down.
