# Transit of Venus! Sydney 2012 Contacts, Contracts and Parallax

Источник: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=og1CzUmnSlE
Канал: Veritasium

[Applause] Now, there are very few things that will get me out of bed in the morning before 8:00, but the transit of Venus is one of them because this is the last time it's going to happen in my lifetime. So, I don't have to worry about this becoming a regular thing. On my way to see the transit of Venus. Okay, so the transit is probably starting right now. This is probably contact one. It's 8:16 a.m. in Sydney. My first look in it. Yeah. Oh, wow. [Music] Can you see it? Absolutely not. You can't see it? Nope. It's like a black dot. That's Venus. It's beautiful. The sun is now out and uh with these silly glasses, you can actually see Venus on the sun. Nowadays, I imagine most people don't get excited about Venus passing in front of the sun. I mean, what's the big deal? But in the old days, it was a really important event because it allowed us to determine the scale of our solar system and then the scale of the universe. Astronomers at the time knew the relative distances between the planets. Because of Kepler's laws, they could calculate the ratios of the different radi of the orbits of planets. But unfortunately, they didn't have any absolute measure. So, they couldn't really say how far anything was from anything else. Edmund Haley, the guy who the comet's named after, was the one who suggested that by timing how long it takes Venus to pass across the face of the sun from different points on the Earth would allow us to measure the distance between the Earth and the Sun. That's using something called parallax. Now, to illustrate parallax, I've actually kind of set up a solar system in my kitchen and living room. So, you can see the sun there behind me. Uh, this is Venus and over here we have the Earth. Oh, sorry guys. Uh, I got to take this. It's Destin from Smarter Every Day. Hey Derek, you there? Yo, what's going on? Hey, what's up, dude? Hey, man. I went up to the Space and Rocket Center. We got the times. You said we could calculate the distance to the sun, right? Uh, yeah. Because we're on opposite sides of the globe, we're going to compare times and calculate the distance to the sun. Uh, my time was uh 6 hours 28 minutes and 4 seconds in Sydney. Okay. What time did you get? 62804, right? 62804. That's me. Okay. Mine was 6 hours 45 minutes and 36 seconds. Oh, a bit longer. All right. So, do I I just go put it in that calculator website you gave me? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Let's do that. Okay. All right. Sounds good. And me just call you back afterwards. Sounds good. All right. Talk to you later. Bye. So, the plan is I'm going to shoot from the Earth, from the top of the Earth, and see what it looks like when I make a transit of Venus across the face of the Sun. And then I'm going to change my perspective slightly. So, I'm going to go to a lower part of the Earth, and I'm going to shoot the same thing. And then I want to overlay those two images to see how Venus looks as it's tracking across the Sun from those two different locations. It should trace out two separate cords across the face of the sun. And that is what allows us to estimate the distance to Venus and the distance to the sun and everything else in the solar system because once we have one absolute distance, we can get all of the distances. So 243 years ago, Captain Cook was down here sent to Tahiti to observe the transit of Venus. And after that, he opened his sealed papers with his secret mission. He was meant to find the great southern land and claim it for Britain, which is what he did. He uh mapped and explore the coasts of New Zealand and Australia before returning home. This was his first voyage to the South Pacific. So, um pretty exciting. And then in I guess kind of a related note, 8 years ago when this transit was taking place, I was actually in the air over the Pacific flying from Vancouver to Sydney to uh make my life here. So, you know, me and Cook, we got something in common, I guess. You know, it's Dustin calling back with the distance. What's going on, Dustin? Hey, what's up, dude? Hey, I got it. I am Woke. It is like It's like 2:00 in the morning here or something. Anyway, it's uh 93 million miles. 93 million? No, I I don't think that's a unit. Is it miles? They got rid of that like 100 years ago. Used to put man on the moon. Wow. Inches. That's That's awesome. You want in kilometers? I want in kilometers. How far is it? Uh it's about 149 and a half and some change uh million kilometers. So that's awesome. That's like bang on. Oh, is it? Yeah. Is that astronomical unit? That is one astronomical unit. So good observing, sir. Well done. Thank you very much. Oh, there was Hey, by the way, there was a a kid there today. We did it at the US Space and Rocket Center under the Saturn 5, but there was a kid there that made his own telescope out of PVC pipe. this. That's awesome, man. I wish I could make a telescope out of PVC pipe. Yeah, he told me how to do it. He ground the glass and everything. It's parabolic. Wow. I want to check that out. So, I'm going to put an annotation over to that video uh of Destin. So So, click on the iPhone here if you want to go see Dustin's video where uh you can make your own telescope out of PVC. I want an iPhone. Yeah. Yeah. Why? Cool. Yeah. Click the iPhone. There you go. Click on it. All right, you better get to bed. Dude, I'm going crazy. I Yeah, I do need some sleep, so I'll let you go. All right, we'll catch you later. Have a good night.
