# What Now For The Higgs Boson?

Источник: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=649iUqrOKuE
Канал: Veritasium

We are on our way to CERN in Geneva. And this is Jean Mark, the cameraman. Hi. And uh we should be coming up on it. That's the dome. That's the famous CERN dome up ahead. Ah, this is pretty exciting. [Applause] On July 4th here at CERN, an historic announcement was made. A new particle had been discovered, most likely the sought-after Higs Bzon. As a layman, I would now say I think we have it. You agree? Yeah. The finding made news around the world and led to an outpouring of emotion from the normally restrained particle physics community. For the discoverers themselves, it was particularly momentous. Wow. I mean, it was I've never seen physicists like this. It really looks beautiful. I cannot tell you how beautiful it is. It makes you cry how beautiful it is. That's why we're here essentially, you know, that that's that's the reason why I I'm doing particle physics. But now that this particle has been found, what's left to do at the Large Hadron Collider? Let's find out. Our current understanding of the universe is based on the modestly named standard model, a theory of all fundamental matter particles and their interactions. Virtually all of the standard model has been verified apart from one crucial element. What gives matter its mass? And to be clear, that is absolutely critically important even to our daily existence. Because if an electron would be massless, it could not be bound to a proton. You could not have an atom and then you know sort of all of you know the stars, the planets, chemistry, life couldn't couldn't exist because instead of electrons bound to protons in in hydrogen atoms and in and in larger atoms instead you would just have electrons whizzing off to infinity. In the standard model, mass is explained by the Higs mechanism of which the Higs Bzon is only one part. For example, you've probably heard that the Higs Bzon gives mass to the other subatomic particles. But if that were true, shouldn't there be Higs Bzons everywhere? I mean, why would it be so difficult to create and detect them? Well, in truth, it's not the particle itself that gives mass to the other particles. It's the Higs field. You can think of the Higs field as a huge sea of honey that fills all space. Some particles are able to travel through it unimpeded whilst others interact with it, slowing down in the process and that translates into mass. When enough high energy is added to the field, fleeting Higs bzons are created. So in order to discover the Higs particle, we needed to invest energy by the collision in the Higs field and create the Higs particle out of it. And then we'll know that indeed we have a Higs. And that's what this incredible machine does. Using powerful magnets, the Large Hadron Collider whizzes two beams of protons in opposite directions around a 27 km circular tunnel. When the protons collide, their energy can be converted into the mass of new particles like the Higs Bzon. Short-lived, these particles decay quickly, and it's their decay products which are then analyzed by massive detectors. This is the giant apparatus at the CMS detector. It's one of two major detectors on the beam line where the protons collide. You can actually see a life-siz picture of the CMS detector. I am standing above the beam line. And so there's protons whizzing around underneath my feet right now, 90 m under the ground at speeds that are basically the speed of light. 99.9999999% the speed of light. You may as well just be the speed of light, but of course a proton can never reach that speed. These are some big toys. The other big experiment examining proton collisions is called Atlas. The teams at Atlas and CMS, each made up of about 3,000 scientists, work independently in a sort of friendly rivalry. uh is it actually friendly? Yes, of course it is. I mean we uh what we what we always say is that uh of course it's essential that if if there's a major discovery which is made that it's confirmed ultimately by the two experiments and independently and that's why the discovery announced earlier this year was so dramatic. Both detectors saw the same results more or less simultaneously. Protons are bags of other particles. When they smash together, a mess of new particles is created. And it's the pattern of the debris that provides the answers. What they saw was evidence of a new particle with a mass of between 125 and 126 ga electron volts. And then we see these two large blobs of energy in the calerime. And you can see them over here. If you added those two bits of energy together, what total energy would you get? I think in this one you get 125 GV. So that seems to be exactly what we'd be expecting if it's a Hig with gamma gamma. But the question now is if it is a Higs, is it the Higs as predicted by the standard model? Are you willing to to make a bet about what kind of Higs Bzon is? Do you think it's the standard model Higs? Wow, that's a difficult one. No, I wouldn't bet my life on uh I might bet my life that we discovered the Higs, but I wouldn't bet my life that it is the standard model Hicks. It's very difficult to tell. All we know is it's there. We we almost know nothing about its properties and its properties are key really to tell us exactly what it is. So to find out the LHC will conduct many more collisions and this should allow scientists to determine the properties of the new particle. If it is not standard model Higs, we may be able to tell that early. We could even tell that this year. As an example, uh both experiments saw a bit too many photons. Too many times the Higs was decaying into photons. more than you'd expect. more than you'd expect. And in the case of strangely, that's exactly what these guys are hoping for, that it doesn't fit the model perfectly, that it's not the standard model Higs. Let let's say that the reason for doing science is of course we're looking for answers, but generating more questions is is an inevitable and and one of the most exciting uh pieces of of of the scientific procedure. And what would that help you determine? I mean, if it's not standard model Higs, that's a big thing. If it's not standard model Higs, then we know that there's new physics for sure. And if the new physics is along the lines that we expect, then we have something pretty profound as a possibility. One would be additional spatial dimensions. Okay, that's one possibility. Another would be really almost a mirror image of the entire universe in terms of particles. That's super symmetry. And and these things would be extremely profound. Whether it turns out to be the standard model Higs or something even more profound, one thing is for sure. The discovery of this new particle is a huge milestone in the long quest to uncover the fundamental laws of nature. [Music] I see. [Music] When it goes up, [Music]
