# A Fake Fields Medal - Numberphile

Источник: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JWtD0O-zSWY
Канал: Numberphile

tell me your your secret plan or your secret campaign that you would like. >> Yeah, I mean talking with many Nobel Prize winners, uh there was something I discovered after some time is that uh you can actually buy when you you win the Nobel Prize, you can buy fake, you know, goldplated but uh not gold made fully made medals like for $400 or $500 and >> like a replica. >> Exactly. It's a replica. And this I would actually like very much to have one or two of them because I can really see that it does make an impact on kids. They remember the moment and that they kind of feel it was maybe a special opportunity. You need this kind of symbol and yeah when I go to Paris from Geneva or even abroad, you know, crossing the border with no I'm not going to bring the fetal for sure. So having this replica would be very practical. I like your idea of a replica Fields medal that you can travel around the world with and not fear losing your original. >> Would you feel like you were shortch changing the children a little bit saying come and see my Fields medal and they weren't looking at a real one? Would it like there's something about the real thing, isn't it? That's magic. >> Aren't we in a world where the symbol is more important than the materiality of the thing? I mean at the end um you know you should I mean basically the kids they don't really care about the metal itself they care about the person they actually listen to for 1 hour 30 or something like that and so they need something to materialize what it is but it's not that uh being made of gold or anything is uh and if this is the lie that's a lie I'm ready to actually >> [laughter] >> produce. It's not a big lie, you know. So, >> Gordon Wil Kopan is awarded the Fields Medal 2022. >> It's a good idea. I hope we can make it happen. Replica Fields Medals, please. Please. [laughter] >> Do you remember when you first heard of the Fields Medal? Do you know when you even knew it was a thing that existed? >> Oh, well, I don't remember exactly when. It became more of a thing for me uh when I was a PhD student because my advisor he didn't have it when it started but he got it during my PhD. So there I got like the experience of somebody getting the f medal and realizing what it meant and so on. So in 2018 I go to ICM I see all these great people having f medal and so on. And then I started hearing rumors that uh it was actually not that far uh for me on this uh on this 2018 round which I think I should never have heard about it because you know then it start to be part of your life and there is this thing in in France you know are you thinking about it when you shave in the morning so I don't shave so much so that that was not really but you know when you know it becomes a possibility it requires additional thinking. an additional mental uh uh load to actually try not that it doesn't impact too much your life. So between 2018 and 2022 I had to be like efficiently and actively trying not to think about it and trying not that it impacts in particular my research. So I didn't want it to impact it and this was a little bit of being careful about it and uh so so these four years were not that nice in full honesty. I remember very well. I will not tell you who it was but somebody telling me you know that people are betting on uh who will get the f medal and the person without asking me permission just shown me the place and started scrolling the comments and some of them were actually very mean and uh and so you know you you don't ask anything you just do your research you like what you do and you discover like this person uh of course you don't exactly know who it is but you can you know see that it's not so many candidates let's say think that this is not worthy anything or this is not worth but and this you just enter in a world that is it's not the reason why you do math it's not the reason why you did enter into research and so this thing was a little bit heavy I must say I mean that that I did not enjoy so much and it was coming from a good heart all the time like nobody was directly mean to me but just put some pressure that you don't I mean that I did not want. >> Can you tell me the story of how you found the news? >> Oh, it was a little bit funny because I received this email from head of IMU. So, I I know that this is for that, right? But I'm very like surprised about the tone of the email that seems worried. And then I discovered that in fact he sent me a first email before that went into my spam. And so I guess the person was like, "Oh no, I felt on one that is gonna refuse it or I don't know." I mean, [laughter] so so so that was a funny thing and just, you know, you won fields made or just went into the spam. I mean, Gmail decided that this is a a spam. >> Were you successful at keeping it a secret? Like because you're not supposed to tell anyone, are you? >> I'm not supposed to tell to whom I said. No, but I I exactly lasted uh I think five minutes with the person that I wanted to talk to tell more uh I mean the most about it. So I I went to visit him. I had I was visiting him the day after it happens to be and after 5 minutes I I told him. >> Can I ask and you describe this how you like why did you win the Fields Medal? What did you do? What was your work that got you the Fields Medal? and you can explain it at whatever level you wish. >> It's something I keep keep asking myself because in some sense I have a very different opinion of my work than what was written in the load which for me is is very strange in some sense like uh I'm not a theory builder and I'm not a problem solver which I [clears throat] mean usually you classify in one of the two in in some sense that I'm more like I'm I'm rectifying uh things that bother me. So when I arrived as a PhD student uh there was a very uh well-developed theory of what we call percolation which is a way of modeling porosity of a medium and there was a very well-developed theory of what we call independent percolation things where you kind of imagine that your medium in different places your stone say whether it's empty or made of stone is independent like if I tell you there is a a punch of a hole here he gives you zero information on whether there is one here or here. But there was as soon as you were introducing dependence like saying that there is a hole here is impacting like it's increasing or decreasing my probability that there is a hole here for instance as soon as you were introducing dependence the theory was not completely vanishing but much much less developed and and for me it was really bothering me when I started the field. I mean I was asked for my PhD to look at actually very evolved questions and even the very basic one I was not understanding. So I started developing with my collaborators like very different people but trying to develop a theory of dependent percolation. It started developing pretty well and we got a more and more robust and developed theory of dependent percolation. And I really thought that if there is a reason uh I get the f medal would be because of this cumulated uh body of works leading to a reasonable theory of dependent peruation. Of course there is much more to be done but basically something more developed than 10 years ago. Let's take two minutes to to tell you a little bit more about the the problem because it's not that complicated. So you you have your stone, right? And you want to understand where there are holes in it or not in order to understand how water or a gas, let's say, but let's say water can flow through it. So what you imagine for instance is that your stone is kind of a grid. I mean I'm drawing it planner because drawing in 3D is not not my specialty. >> But your work did deal with 3D. did deal with 3D with 4D where there are links to other things. I mean it do it did uh look I mean 2D as well I mean you can do it in different dimensions and basically here what you are going to say is like okay I want to model the the stone so I'm going to think that there are holes in it where water can be. So more generally what you can do is for each hole you can toss a coin and if it's face I don't know up you color it in blue and if it's tail you color it in gray or you keep it in white just say that the holes are when you hit face and what you realize here when you do this sampling can water flow through my stone or not. So for instance, this is my sampling. Is there a path here? I can say my stone is porous to water because you can see that there is a path of blue going from top to bottom. It's independent in the sense that if I tell you this is blue, it's because I toss a coin there. But it gives me no information on there, right? Because I'm going to retos the coin. >> So this was this is barely percolation in the sense it's independent percolation. And we wanted to build a theory of dependent percolation where in some sense maybe for instance the fact that this is blue this is blue this is blue is impacting what is happening here. >> How can it be related? >> So for instance you could imagine you know imagine that all those are chosen to be blue. Maybe you know you should in this case say well this one is automatically blue because I mean you are not going to have a levitating piece of stone for instance or in more generally this is one way of sampling randomness like to choose the colors you could find another one there are other ways where this time there is dependency where you can color uh uh I mean uh color a stone or I mean a grid in blue and and white. So there are many many ways and very natural ones actually involve dependency and so when we started for those natural models of percolation the theory was not fully collapsing but basically was much more limited. >> You're saying oh you know rock can't float this is made of rock or what's deciding what colors in and that you know natural factors and that this feels real world to me. that feels real world but the the the the question is a motivation in some sense. So, so this is the motivation but then the [clears throat] model is a model of random graph basically it's fully on the on the mathematical world and then when people think application they think okay what you are going to develop in this thing is it going to impact real world uh like back and this arrow back to the real world for me it's I mean I have no idea and I And many >> this is not not my department. >> That's not my department. Exactly. I'm participating to like an environment where mathematics is produced and some of this mathematics is going to be useful but I cannot really say that mine is going to be useful and in some sense I want not to think about it because my creativity is going to be like led by something different like by a different vision which is more maybe tool oriented or idea oriented than applicationdriven. So, so in some sense I'm very happy with not thinking about these applications. Yeah. >> Okay. Let me come back to your train of thought earlier. You and others had success here that was significant and you thought that was going to be the fields. >> Yeah. I thought that this would be uh basically the thing which probably was not totally obvious because you couldn't single out like one result uh that but but in fact when when when I learned about the loatio it was very much focused on uh on some very late result I made in uh in my career actually like pretty recent results maybe from 2020 or something like that and and which are very much related to another model not of porous stone but of magnetism. In some sense you imagine you know a huge magnet and you want to understand why this magnet when you heat it you may get lose magnetization at a certain temperature. So if you take a magnet you hit it at certain temperature loses magnetization. It's called cury temperature. And there the idea is a little bit different is that you you imagine that your magnet is made of a a collection of small magnets like that and that these magnets they they have like two mechanisms that rule their behavior. The first one is the temperature which is kind of telling them how excited they are like how much they are going to listen to the rule. And the other mechanism is actually a pretty natural one which is that these small magnets they want to align exactly like big ones. And by kind of looking at the interplay between this rule that they want to follow which is alignment and this excitation this disorder coming from temperature. You want to understand if they tend to align in one direction or they tend to just do whatever they want and and when they do whatever they want and basically half is pointing in one direction, half is pointing in the other one, you lose magnetization. The global magnet in some sense, it's like half the small ones are pulling in one direction and the other half is pulling in the other one. So it cancels. And this is the model, the easing model. And >> this feels >> again, this doesn't feel like mathematics. This feels like physics. >> I hear what you it comes from physics. These two models they are motivated by physical systems and they were sometimes in this case for instance is the easing model. It was invented by physicists but then you can study them mathematically and um and there there were a body of works uh I mean in particular in two dimension and very little was known in three and four dimension. Three dimension is the dimension of your magnets. So this is interesting and four dimension is actually related to quantum field theory. So so so to physics again and so we produce results in three and 4D for this easing model and this was like the beginning of the load show was really about that. [applause] I know you said you were never aiming for the medal. It was never a goal or a finish line for you. But it is like a a crowning achievement of one's career. Like you know when you are introduced when you when you are on a poster when you walk into a room you're the guy who won the Fields medal. It's become like a a big part of your career. Surely. Surely. >> Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. But >> is how do you go on from that? How do you keep motivated? What make what motivates you to keep doing great things? >> The same thing as before. That's the point is that I mean in some sense it doesn't change the reason why you do research. It's so so I still you know I mean uh on the the the the fourth or I don't remember if yeah it was the 5th of July on the 4th of July I had a problem I wanted to solve and on the 6th it was still there. So in some sense uh you keep trying to answer the question that you ask yourself and this this doesn't change anything. the price is actually not giving you fulfillment from that point of view and uh it never will and the next price will not if it happens or not I don't know but I mean the thing is that it's really it doesn't change your mental uh approach to mathematics and I still have the problems I want to uh to solve. Yeah, maybe people would not think they are the most important problems, but I mean before the f medals, they didn't think that either for most of them. So, so I mean anyways importance is what I feel is uh I want to solve or I want to answer. This didn't change with the fields medal at all. >> I often ask mathematicians at the end of the videos to sign the papers for me. And I always joke to them, will you sign the paper cuz one day if you win the Fields medal, these will be worth more money. You actually have got a field medal. So I don't know how you're going to make these worth more money. >> Yeah. And I mean I have two papers. So I'm going to be able to show you one regret I have. >> Okay. >> So this is my signature that I thought was you know a great signature to have. >> Wow. >> When I was a kid. >> You can't have a signature that complicated when you have to sign lots of words. >> Exactly. And I understood that very very much. The first time I gave a talk in front of uh you know I gave hundred of of talks now in front of kids. These are the best one to give and uh and kids like at the end of a talk to uh to to kids like say to middle school uh there is like three possibilities. First possibility everybody leaves and you you are like okay well it's done. Second possibility, everybody is about to leave, but somebody comes and ask for a selfie. And then if this happens, then you have 100 kids lining up for a selfie. And this is fine. It's it's cool. Blah blah. You need to to smile. And now apparently I have this smile, but it looks exactly the same on every picture. There is a third possibility and this one is a painful one is that somebody comes and ask for an autograph and then you have 100 kids that wants an autograph and this really is awful when you have this kind of signature. >> So then I decided that my new signature was that and uh this is like the young me is dying but the old me still has a rest thanks to that. So yes, my two signatures. >> You can catch a longer and different edit of this interview on the Number File podcast. I'll also put links down below to number file interviews with other winners from Hugo's class of 22. >> Sort of have it locked in a box at home, which means I don't actually see it very often. >> Plus interviews with fellow French Fields medalist Cedric Vani. Then the phone rings. >> Hello. and watched the moment I borrowed a Fields Medal in order to impress people during a speech at the Royal Society. But I know a guy >> for me. Am I being awarded the Fields Medal? Well, thank you very much. >> As I said, links down below to all this and even more. Check it out. >> Lecturers [music] do and teachers do. They This happens all the time. And he he crossed it out and just got on with what he was doing. Cracked on. But I stopped him and I this was before he'd won the Fields Medal, but there were lots of rumors that he might get one because he was doing some good stuff. And I said to him, you know, James, if you ever win the Fields Medal, I'm going to have this piece of video of me correcting your mathematics.
