# A Mysterious Math Doodle - Numberphile

Источник: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vn-0zSuAWpI
Канал: Numberphile

Hi there everyone. This is Keith Moore. He's the head librarian at the Royal Society. Some of you may recognize him already. A lot of you won't. We're going to show you something and then I'll tell you something else about Keith that's really interesting. This is a letter from the archives at the Royal Society and it's written by one very famous mathematician to another one. It's written by John Hershel to Charles Babage. This is no formal boring stuffy letter. In fact, Keith, tell us a little bit about what this says. Well, this is uh from quite an early period in in the life of of Hershel and and Babage. So, this is 1817. They're quite young men. They're talking about George Peacock, one of their mathematician friends. They're talking about an election certificate for something. It doesn't quite say what, but um what Hershel says is that Peacock is a noodle for neglecting it. So, and if you have done the same, that's Babage. You are a doodle. I digested as you may doodle doo. These are senior scientists, Brady. They're calling each other noodles and doodles and dood mathematicians. They're quite young. Anyway, the thing I want to show all of you, the number five viewers, is what's on the next page of this letter because it's quite interesting to look at and it might be a bit of a puzzle. Let's have a look what's next here. I'm going to turn the page. Now, the letter continues here on the left, and you can see it's signed off with a signature of Hershel himself. But what's really interesting is here on this facing page, besides a little bit of the original wax there from sealing the letter, he's written something here. Keith, what has he written? I'm I'm I'm not doing that to sort of bring you into the video. I'm doing it because I can't read the handwriting. What's he written here? So, what he said is as as a PS almost is interpret this hieroglyphic. It contains a great discovery. So apparently hidden within this picture that Hershel, the famous Hershel has drawn and sent to the equally famous Babage is some kind of discovery. Is there a mystery, a puzzle? What's going on? So you what you have here is this central figure which Hershel says is Dionius, the god of functions. Alias, the genius of abstract numerical magnitude. And you can see that he's surrounded not just by some random figures here, but some of the drawing itself is made up of numbers. So you can probably see ones and zeros here, and there's a little bit on the end. So uh what Hershel is saying is hidden in here, there's something very important. I kind of doubt it, but maybe the viewers can tell us. I don't know. Neither of us are mathematicians. Well, that's right. We need help. Okay, I will put an image of this elsewhere on the internet. You can check out the video description. there'll be more information. But if you find things like this interesting, if you love these old documents, old scientific objects, things like that, Keith and I get together every week on another YouTube channel called Objectivity. There'll be a link to that on the screen in the description. Sometimes it's stuff like this. Sometimes it's machines. Sometimes it's telescopes. We did one with Isaac Newton's telescope every week. A really cool new object. We've done nearly 30 of them already. Check it out if it's something you haven't seen already. And if you do watch it, well, thanks. And thanks for this, Keith. I'm going to get to work figuring this out. Thank you. Here we go. Oh, there we go. Look. So, there's the earth turning as I turn the handle. Day to night. Seriously, I love this thing. I think I think if the Royal Society was on fire, which I hope never happens, this would be one of the things I would grab.
