# Almost Interesting Facts about 6-7 - Numberphile

Источник: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qdXiQ6IM-Cs
Канал: Numberphile

Okay, so 67 67 is both a fortunate prime and a lucky prime. Fortunate primes are named after a guy called Rio Fortune. Pretty cool name, I think. And so what it is is how do you get a fortunate prime? So what you have to do is you have to take you have to construct the prime orals which are products of primes. Okay? So, so the nth primorial is just 2 * 3 * 5 until and then you carry on taking these products until you get to the nth prime. Okay, so the fortunate numbers are what you get. You have to ask what do I have to add to this number? And it has to be a number bigger than one. What do I have to add to this number to get to the next prime? Okay, so let me do an example so so you can see it. So let's do 2 * three. Okay, so that's the so that's six, right? So the next prime number is seven of course but that to get to that only have to add one. So we don't include that. That's not that's not we don't count that. We have to go we have to add some a number bigger than one. So to get to the next prime number we have to add five. Okay. To get to 11. Okay. That means five is fortunate. >> Okay. >> That's the definition. Let's do it again. So let's do 2 * 3 * 5. What's that? That's um that's 30. What do we have to add to this to get to the next prime number? Well, we can't do one because we're not allowed to do one. Always has We always have to do something bigger than one. Where's the next prime number after that? 30. It's probably 37, is it? >> It's 37 prime or is that one of those tricky ones though, isn't it? >> 37's prime, I think. >> Okay. All right. Yeah. So, 37's prime. So, that means that seven is going to be a fortunate number. Uh, so we add seven to this, we we get it. Okay. So, 67 is also a fortunate number. Okay. How do we see that? Okay. So, we take the first 11 primes. Okay. So 2 * 3 * 5 * 7 * 11 * 13 * 17 * 19 * 23 * 29 * 31 and then if we add 67 to that we get a prime number. So and it's the next prime number after this you don't count adding one. Okay so that's makes 67 fortunate. So it's it's so there's a little conjecture actually is that all fortunate numbers are prime not proven. >> All fortunate numbers are prime. Oh because the ones you showed me so far were >> they were but but there was no reason for them to be in principle. >> Yeah. >> Right. Right. Because because the question is you take your first n primes. You then ask how much do I have to add to it to get to the next prime number? As long as you add something bigger than one. >> Yeah. It doesn't have to be a prime number but but all but it seems they are. Oh, that surprises me. >> Yeah. Yeah, agreed. >> Little bit surprising, isn't it? >> I thought I thought you were going to say it's conjectured that every number is fortunate at some stage. >> No, no, no. But all fortunate numbers are prime is is the expectation. Yeah. Yeah. But but I don't think it's been proven. >> Surely you're going to get to a point eventually where you multiply so many of these numbers together that you get such a big number that the next prime is going to be very very distant. >> Yeah. But apparently you need to the claim is that you probably need I probably don't know this for a fact that you'll have to add a prime to get to it. >> Got to get on to that. [laughter] >> Okay. All right. Lucky numbers. >> Lucky numbers. >> Um Okay. I'm going to need another sheet. >> All right. Let's get you more paper. [music] >> So 67 is also a lucky prime, which is different to being a fortunate prime. By the way, what's a So what a lucky prime is is a a lucky number which is also prime. Now lucky numbers don't have to be prime. Um so what's a lucky number? Okay, so to get a lucky number you have to do uh adopt this what's called a s civ algorithm. So you take all the numbers. Okay, so I'll just I'm going to write a bunch of numbers. I'll try to write one to 100 here. 13 15 16 17 18 6 5 6 5 6 5 6 5 6 57 68 69 78. Stop. We can stop there, right? I've written out all the numbers from 1 to 70. Actually, I could have done more in principle. And so what we're going to do is we're going to start getting rid of some. Okay, so we start with one and we say what's the next number after one. Okay, so it's two, right? So we're going to get rid of every second number. Okay, so that means we're going to get rid of all the all the even numbers. Okay, so we get rid of that. We get rid of that. Okay, so [laughter] >> there they go. All the even numbers. >> All even numbers are going. >> You're out of here. >> Okay, so now you move on. So you carry on s. Okay, so you start with one. So one's one's now in the bag. Okay, start with one and you say, what what's the next number now that survives? Well, it's three. Okay, so we'll keep that. And now we say, right, we're going to get rid of every third number in the sequence. Okay. So, we're going to get rid of what? One, two, three. >> Every third surviving number. >> Every third surviving number. Yeah. Okay. Right. Okay. So, and then and then you carry on like this. You just carry on the algorithm. So, say, okay, so now so now we can keep seven. >> Seven's lucky. >> Yeah. So, seven's lucky. So, we say, well, what was the next one after one? Well, we've already done three. So, it's the it's the seven. So, now we have to get rid of every seventh number in the sequence. Okay. So, this that's still surviving. Okay. So what's the seventh number? One, two. >> Not every not every fourth number or every >> No, no, no. So no, because we we we we've binned four. That's just dropped out. We we we go to the next number that survives in the sequence. So now we drop out get rid of the seventh number. >> All right. So it's a one, two, three, four, five, six, seven. That's gone. One, two, three, four, five, six, seven. Gone. One, two, three, four, five, six. I'm saying six, seven a lot. Seven. [laughter] >> Okay. >> And you carry on like this until you've served out a load of numbers. And by the time you've got to the end of it, you will find that 67 survives. 67 survives. So it is a lucky number. So there you go. So that's uh that's 67. 67. There's plenty of maths in there. There's probably math we haven't talked about. >> Yeah. Uh >> did you check the OEIS to see if there were any sequences that were just 67? >> Well, okay. So I did. What I did do is I checked all sequences that have six seven in them. Okay. So, so you can >> there'll be a lot of those. >> There's tons of them. So, I did actually try to, you know, I was looking to see if I could find the most interesting ones. There were none that really jumped out to me. >> And there were none that were just 67. >> I couldn't find any that were just 67. Is there a way of searching? We build these videos in real time, Brady. Right. So, we had a look on OEIS to see it was any any sequences with just six 67 in there. Uh, this is the only one that we found. uh 67 67 67 67. Can you imagine that? Can you imagine what this this sequence would do to school kids? They'd go out. I think they'd explode. Uh like continued fraction of of of 3 plus the square root of 483 over 7 decimal expansion of 67 over 99 whatever. Yeah, this is it. So it's out there, right? Should we finish with a joke, Brady? >> Go on. >> What? [laughter] This is crap joke. Why? Why is six afraid of seven? >> Go on. >> You don't know. Seven because 789. >> Yeah, >> I think we're done. [laughter] H. So 67. Another cool thing about 67. Now, my wife told me not to tell you about this one, but I like it and I think it's good and I think you'll agree, Brady. So, let's let me tell you this one right here. Let's take this number e to the pi to the square root of 67. Okay. What is this? It's 147 1 nine seven9 nine nine nine nine and then there's some other numbers over there right yeah >> this number so look look at this right this number this weird combination of things e to the pi to the square root of a prime number which is 67 right is is called an almost integer it's really really really close to an integer it's absurdly close to an integer given what we how we constructed it that's I think that's amazing >> I think that's pretty cool right that's look it's really really close to being an integer >> and it's kind of got no right to be right now the reason this is cause of course it's got to do with ramen right okay because there's another example of this e to the pi of the roo of 163 this one's very much associated with ramen again no right to be close to an integer but it is it's ridiculously close to an integer >> that one's even closer actually >> this one is even closer so this one I think is often associated with Rammenujen. Um >> presumably because of the nature of E and the nature of pi, there's no number you can put in the square root there. >> Absolutely not. No, there there's only there's only a small handful of numbers that you can put there. >> But no number's going to get you an integer. >> I would have thought not. No, I would have thought not. No, no, no. Never's going to give you an integer. There are these all so these are called almost integers. uh other ones that that appear that are are relevant that are similar in in how they are to this e to the pi square of 43 is another one. >> Yeah. >> Uh I think e to the pi square root of 19 I think is another one. So so actually it's only a small handful of these numbers uh for this which this works. This is because 19 43 67 and 163 are all hea numbers. Okay. Now I can give you a little background as to why these guys these there's a very small handful of numbers for which you're going to get these almost integers. >> First of all, one question. >> Yeah. >> How many nines do you have to have after the decimal place to be considered an almost integer? >> Well, okay. So, so this this relates to why all the hea numbers don't give you almost integers because the the smaller the hea there there are only nine of these hea numbers. There's a very small number of numbers. Yeah. And and the smaller the hea number, the uh the the less close to an integer you get from it. So that's why the best one is this one because it's the largest of the hea numbers. But 67 is the the second best actually. So the reason it works is because it's it's very deep number theoretical thing. Um if you write e to the square root of pi d right h then this is equal to and you can show this using something called a q expansion we don't have to go into details of what that is there modular function so don't worry about what that is but it's called the j function and it's one if I I can show that this is equal to this plus 744 plus loads of really small numbers and these small numbers go like e to the minus pi roo So they sort of scale like that. So this is this is a true true this is a true expression. These these are called modular functions. This is a modular function. This thing crops up in string theory. Actually back to that again. All all this things comes around full circle. So this is related to string theory. Now the cool thing is there are only a certain set of numbers these hea numbers for which when you shove the value of D into this J function you get an integer right and it's this one this one this one this one right so so that's why it works so you end up with this very nice approximation but if you like you said if I just put in 22 for D this J function is not going to be an integer and therefore you won't get an almost integer from from E to pi roo 22 it's just not going to work. So we've also got and this is why I left us some space at the top the pre-existing ones there's e * pi to the square of 67. Is there some insight this pattern can give us? So actually these are called HeNo numbers.
