# Calculator Unboxing #7 (Gaxio) - Numberphile

Источник: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ovsYv-b-wWI
Канал: Numberphile

Hello calculator fancers. We have a real treat today. A viewer, a home amateur calculator reviewer sent me in a calculator I have never seen before. This is the Galaxio. And they emailed and said, "Have you ever seen a Gaxio?" I said, "I had not." And they got this shipped to me direct from the Galaxio warehouse, wherever that may be. And so on the front you can see it's a Galaxio FG82MS. Very nice. It is a scientific calculator. On the back you have all the options labeled. It comes it comes with a slide on hard case. Loving that. And oh down the bottom there made in China. Some of you may think the GIO is a little bit familiar. It looks vaguely like something you've seen before. Well, I have here a previous review we did of a Casio, a member of the FX series. And you can see the surprising similarities. Look at that. They're pretty much the same calculator just in different packaging. One's in a slightly cheaper packet than the other. Oh, the fact you're now watching an unboxing video in an unboxing video. Now, blatantly, the calculators cannot accidentally be this similar. When I saw this, it has sent ripples through the calculator fancier community. Everyone's outright. I mean, surely if you're designing a calculator, at least design your own calculator. Just rip off someone else's making a cheap version of the calculator. I mean, we are outraged. I will not let this go down. I I am I could not believe that Casio just ripped off Gaxio's fantastic design. So, let's get in there and see what the original has to offer. Now, I am a little hesitant to break the package. I don't want have to cut into it. If only it came with a little tab so I could open it in. Ah, here we go. Look at that. So, I can pop that open there. Look at that. Just slid out. What an action. Uh there's uh the All the instructions are bound to So often I open a calculator, the instructions fly one way, calculator the other. I never match them back up again. This it's all contained. Very nice. Put that over there. Uh, okay. Let's pop uh the packet open and we have Okay, so there's the calculator and it's slide on hard case. Okay, so you can see already this covers a variety of models. So if you own any of these and obviously you're going to have more than one GIO around the place. You can just look them up in there. Very unfortunately it's for the various FX models. And what we have here is actually the Gaxio FG82MS not covered by this set of instructions. Now you might think this is very suspicious that a Galaxio FG series calculator comes with instructions something labeled the FX series. And it's Casio as we know who make the FX series of calculator. Okay. So that case did indeed slide off hard. Uh and oh here there's the uh inset in there. And you can see they've not glued it in properly. Uh so if you decide you want to remove it and stick it to the outside like so. That is entirely Oh, I didn't quite Okay, you get the idea. Anyways, look at this. This is the FG series classic. That's good. High quality manufacturing is only Galaxio can do. Okay, I don't know who quality control person 28R, but whoever he or she is, they know a perfect calculator when they see one. All right, let's take this thing out for a spin. Two square root. Oh, it's around the wrong way. Oh my goodness. Okay. Okay, hang on. Sorry. Sorry. 2 square equals nice times two. Oh, okay. So, they know if you're typing two a second time, you know what you've typed. Why waste an entire part of the display when they can show you a fraction of it? That they've simplified. Even down here, they've taken chunks off this number here. So, uh you don't need all those extra digits. And you can see everyone knows the square root of two is 1.411, whatever that is. 13. Okay, here we go. 2 equals 31.11 something. Okay. [Laughter] Okay. Okay. Hang on. Hang on. Okay. I'm going to be honest with you here. 31.11, whatever that is. It's not quite two, but it's not 1.999. So, you know, it's it's gone different in all new and creative ways. Let's try something uh a bit more down the line. Let's put in pi. So, we got pi down here. Okay. Shift pi. Excellent. And let's just try multiplying it by one to see if it can do that. Equals 3.141 something 9. Okay. Okay. Okay. That's okay. That's not so bad. Let's try dividing by zero and see what happens here. 1 / 0 equals that's that's a meth error. So this calculator has had too much meth. So, when I was testing the inferior knockoff Casio FX, I tried the square root of 17. Square root of 17. You simply type square of 17. You hit equals and it tells you that it's the square root of 17. So, let's see how this one does without 17. Equals a number. Okay, let's multiply that by the square root of 17. And that equals Hey, hey, hey, it did it. Okay, I'm doubting myself. I'm going to redo 2 times roo2 equals two. What did I do before? Obviously, the first calculation out of the box is just a warm-up calculation where it gives you a random kind of test calibration number. Now, it's it's it's actually I can feel it is genuinely it's heating up. It's now warmed up and ready to go. So, as a whole, it's quite it's got quite a nice hand feel. I mean, it's got these these kind of wings, which which is sweet. And uh I mean, the Casio calculators, they're reasonably heavy. They've got what feels like a lot of plastic. Whereas these, I mean, the Galaxio, it's environmentally friendly. It doesn't use any more plastic than absolutely necessary. It's got a real light kind of, you know, could go at any moment feel. And I I appreciate that dedication to efficiency in manufacturing. Final scores for the imported Galaxio FX. I mean, sorry, FG. None of that knockoff Casio rubbish. FG82 MS. For display, it's got a good display. Bits of it seem to come and go all the time, though. So, I'm going to give it an eight, or rather most of an eight. For functionality, it's got everything I need. That'll be an eight. For accuracy, I wanted to give it a higher score, but it's not quite there every now and then. So, I I'll drop the 10 down to an eight. Ergonomics works well in both hands. I reckon it's around an eight. For cred, I mean, it's got the Gaxio name. What more do you need? That's an eight. And for durability, obviously an eight. That gives us a total score of 888. Okay, that's it. Look, we're going to very quickly check that in the instructions. So uh you can see here uh start the English bit. Chinese [Applause] Chinese no English. No other languages. Okay. So normally they have every possible language here. Unless you're fluent in Chinese symbols. No luck. Yes, that's the Gaxio attention to detail.
