# Calculating Pi with Skittles (and census data!?) - Numberphile

Источник: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7O6ej9OSW2w
Канал: Numberphile

We're going to do a bit of We're going to play around with, well, pie and some uh Skittles. I need a circle. This was Brady's clever idea for a circle, so Oh, I've just knocked it. That's not ideal, but I think I'll be all right. Now, we have to draw a square uh around this circle, so the circle just fits perfectly inside. So, we're going to need some books for that. Uh what better book to use than than this one here, Brady? Who's Who's that? >> Oh, I don't know. It's just a Yeah, this this guy. I don't know who he is. Yeah. Yeah, fantastic numbers. So, we're going to use that. And [snorts] we're also going to use this book by our colleague, Emma, um new book out, Radio Universe. Go and buy it. Out today? [snorts] It Is it Is it actually today it's come out? Yeah. Yeah, also we got an advanced copy there, Brady. Very good. It's my thesis, Brady. My thesis. Show my age there. All right, strings there. No strings here. I think that'll do. Now, what we've got to do is you've got to go a bit wild with a with a bunch of Skittles that I bought yesterday with my kids. So, we're just going to drop them in. Oh, that's a That's a rubbish dive. [laughter] Yeah, I'm just going to do maybe a little bit more. That's quite good. The room now smells of Skittles. Okay, so now we've got to count. How are we going to do that? So, we're going to count um let's use this. Right, we'll just So, we're going to count the ones in the circle first. 5 6 7 8 9 10. I'm going to do 10. You keep You keep the number of 10s in your head, okay? 8 10 10 1 2 8 9 60 8 So, you're saying there's online See, I'm sort of dubious about whether these are online or not cuz technically that's That space shouldn't exist. 562. Okay. I call that. Let's Yeah, let's let's call that. 562 from the interior. >> Yeah, okay. So, what do we have? 159 outside? Right, good. I'm reading Skittles. I I read Skittles. [laughter] So, 562 + 159. Yep. Quite isn't it, Brady? 721, that's the total. Okay, we're going to do 562, which is the number inside the circle, divided by the total number, which is 721. Okay, that's our first step. Equals Okay, and now the next step, if I multiply that is this by four, I should get pi. Very close to pi. Should we try it? Yeah. Oh god. Not bad. 3.1, still got 3.1. I I think it's all right. I What do you reckon? It's all right. It could have been better, couldn't it? Yeah, but it's all right. I think it's those dodgy edge ones. Yeah, the ones that were on the line. >> Yeah. Do it again. No. >> [laughter] >> So, should I should probably explain how it works. Should I explain how it works first? >> Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. Why does it work? It's pretty simple, actually. So, if I imagine that this is this is got unit radius, okay? So, distance between there and there and there is one, then these area of the circle is pi r squared, so it's so it's the area of the circle would be pi, right? If that distance is one, okay, then the edge of the square is two. The square has got area four. Okay? So, the ratio between the area of the circle and the area of the square is pi by four. Okay? So, that's So, that's So, I So, I assume that the Skittles are distributed pretty randomly, okay? Maybe, yeah. Yeah, yeah, yeah. >> [laughter] >> And so So, if that's the case, then the then what you should be doing off, you should find that the the ratio should be pi by four. So, that's why I multiplied the answer by four at the end. So, it's pretty simple, right? It's pretty simple experiment that everyone can try with enough Skittles, man. So, but you're going to scale it up. I'm going to scale it up. Doesn't it I will see if we get a better answer. So, I thought we could do this with people, right? So, I I downloaded a load of data about where people live in the UK from the Office of National Statistics from the last census. And I thought what we could do is we could just sort of pin a location, pin a center point, and then we put a radius uh of distance outside. And what we've done is I built the square and I built the circle, and we can ask how many people live in each and get an estimate for pi in exactly the same way, but with people rather than skills, right? I don't know if people will behave better than skittles. It it remains to be seen, but >> Cuz people tend to clump where they live, don't they, in cities and >> Yeah, so we So, I suspect we'll see that. So, if we if we last this in the middle of a city, I suspect we're not going to get a very good estimate of pi. Whereas if we do it in a big area over a countryside, we'll probably get a much better. So, this should now This is not in a university where we are now. We can put in a a radius. I'll suggest a radius of 100 km. Put that We've put our GPS coordinates in. Let's do it. Let's do it. Let's see what It's creating a square and a circle and then pulling all the data, is it? >> Exactly. It's It's It's It's It's basically It's figured out where we were. It's It's then identified the the circle of of radius In this case, 100 km from where we are, and the square that just fits around, exactly like this, and it's got population data for those locations, which obviously split up into It's actually split up into quite precise polygons, actually. So, it should be fairly accurate. So, population numbers for this for inside the circle of 100 km from from Nottingham from where we are now, about 16 million 16.2 million. The population in the corresponding square is about 20.389 million. Okay? Giving us an estimate of pi, which is 3.18. Ooh. You thought it'd be better, right? Didn't you? I did. Go on. Anfield. The home of Liverpool. The home of Liverpool. Okay, let's do Anfield. All right, so we're going to run Anfield now. Uh so, Anfield, we've got a GPS coordinates here. Obviously, this is Now, Anfield's not far from the coast, is it? >> Yeah, so it should be bad. Yeah, yeah, cuz a lot of it's going to be sea. Yeah. But what matters I suppose is is the proportion in the square and the proportion in the circle the same as in as is in the C. That's all that really matters. If it's not if that is true then we should be roughly fine. Okay, we have the population numbers. It's still creating the images but it's got we've got the population numbers. So population inside the circle 11. Remember we've done 100 km again. 11.02 million. Inside the square 13.4 6 6 million giving an estimate of pi better or worse than than here? I think it's going to be worse. >> It's quite a lot worse. It's bad. 3 3.27 Yeah, it's this it's that C and the funny shape of the coast. Did you say you had Buckingham Palace? I have got Buckingham Palace, yeah. >> I mean that's going to be nearest the coast too, isn't it? Cuz London's not far from Do you want to change the radius so we can see a little bit what happens when we when we mess about with the radius. What radius do you want to do? Should we do So we're in the we're right in the heart of London. So do we want to make it bigger and take in what's outside London or do we want to make it smaller and keep it interesting? >> It's very densely populated. Let's do 10 Let's do 10 km. Let's go Let's go lower. I think this is going to be bad. 1.4 million people living in 10 km of Buckingham Palace. We got a population in the square of 1.7 million. We've got an answer. These numbers are low which is going to make it worse as well. But I think it's the spikiness of the data is what's not good. 3.28 for pi. Yeah, as you can see it's quite it's not very uniform, is it? Should we do the exact center of England? Like Yeah, let's do it. Uh so I can give you its latitude. I think it's a farm. The center of England is somewhere in Leicestershire. I've been there. Have you? Yeah. Is it good? It's a farm. >> think it's a farm? And it was owned by a couple called Mr. and Mrs. Farmer. Oh, there you go. That's So you know all about this farm. >> a lot about it. I know more about this than I care to admit. >> Okay. It's not great but it's better than some of the other ones. Okay, we got population inside the circle 13.7 million population in the square, 18 million. Estimate for pi, 3.049. We're doing better with the skills, man. We did do better with the skills. Let's Let's get back to this. >> Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. That's cool. Yeah. Yeah. So, you get these approximations of pi, right? Okay, 3.15 is not such a good approximation. 3.14 is a little better. It turns out that the next one is something like 31414, which is even better, and so on.
