# Conway's Base 13 Function - Numberphile

Источник: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zsBaApyf_Ns
Канал: Numberphile

I want to show you a mind-blowing function. Of course, due to Conway, the function is called Conway's base 13 function. Before we dive into why this is so amazing, we need to understand something about functions so that you understand why it's so amazing. What sort of function if I ask you as a person who interacted with a lot of mathematician but is not a mathematician. So what would you say is a function? >> I when I think of a function I think of the that f with an x in brackets and it's usually like an equation and I usually imagine the equation is going to end up being graphed when I see it. That's what I usually think of. >> Right. Okay. So you're right and this is kind of the the standard way of looking at this. You have something like f ofx equals some value maybe an expression with x. I don't know x + 1. Let's make it more interesting. X² + 1. Okay. And then you have this standard graph where here we have x and here we have y. And the function will be a graph that looks kind of like this. And here this line is y = f ofx. So if I take a point here, the value the y-coordinate on this line is going to be the value that f gives to this point. Let's say that this was one. What's f of 1? F of 1 is 1^2 + 1 is 2. And maybe we take min -5 here. So f of -5 is going to be -5^ squar + 1 that's 26. This value here this is going to be 26. Okay. The key and most important property of a function is that it gives you a unique value. Whatever you put into it, as long as you keep putting the same input, you always get the same output. There's no way that I will say, okay, maybe now f of one is two, but later I'll try again and f of one will be seven. That's not how it works. A function is is is a fixed thing in the mathematical universe. It's predetermined. All the values are just there. Functions don't necessarily have to be continuous, right? So for example, we can have a function that maybe looks like this, a step function as they're known. It goes here and then it just jumps and it goes a little bit here and maybe then it jumps over there and then it jumps and it jumps and jumps and it goes up and down, up and down, up and down. Functions can be even more complicated. Let's divide this interval and we have one here and zero here. And we're going to have half. It's not accurate because I'm I need more space here and a third and a quarter and a fifth and so on. And what I'm going to do is I'm just going to give these points 1 / n. I'm going to give the value one and everything else is going to have the value zero. So it's going to look like this. This point well I haven't told you what the value is. You can't determine from just what the information I've given you. But let's assume that we gave it zero. So the graph is going to look like almost like a full line here and then there's going to be dots and the dots are going to get closer and closer and closer and closer to each other. But also this line is almost continuous. So the graph is almost if you if you zoom out is going to look kind of like two parallel lines because the resolution of how we see things is not good enough. But if you zoom in, it will always look like this. There's going to be gaps and the lines are going to be getting shorter and shorter. Let's talk about Conway's base 13. And why is it so amazing, but we're going to need more paper. First, we need to talk about a base, right? So, normally you write numbers in base 10. So for example 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 and then 10 11 12 13 and so on. Base is essentially saying let's take these digits up to 9. But then instead of 10 which is now two digits we're going to introduce symbols to have the value 10 and 11 and 12. So we have 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 a b and c. What does 13 look like in this paper? >> 13 becomes 10. >> We hit two digits. >> Yes. >> So just as a a quick exercise, uh if we have the number 99 in base 10, let's convert it to base 13. Oh god. >> Go on then. You've created a run for your own pack then. What is it? What is it? >> Okay, so this is going to be something time. 99 / 13 is 7. And then 7 * 13 is 91. And so the remainder is uh six. No, it's eight. And so we get 78. >> Okay. In base 13. >> So every every number in base 10 can be converted to base 13. >> Exactly. Right. And if you go higher, you get something that maybe looks like a five or a c. Okay. Why is this useful? Well, the base 13 actually extends to all real numbers. Don't ask me to to write down pi in base 13. I am not able to do that. But you can do that right. Just like when you write uh you know 3.14 what you really write is 3 * 10^ 0 + 1 * 10^ -1 + 4 * 10 ^ of minus 2. You can do the same thing and kind of go backwards even in the case of pi in the case of square root of two any real number. So now I'm going to take a real number and I'm going to ask how does it look like in base 13 and you know it's going to look like some digits uh you know d 0 z d1 d2 dn some integer part like three in this case it could have been 300 million right then there's going to be well it's not a decimal point, right? Uh but a point and now there's going to be some sequence that looks like uh let me use x to determine those x0 x1 x2. What Conway does is the following. Look at this expansion. Maybe maybe at some point in the expansion you have for the very last time the digit A followed by a block of decimals. Okay, so this is 0 to 9 digits and then the number B. Well, he uses C but it's fine. Doesn't really matter. Then the number B and then from here on end only 0 to 9 appear. >> Okay. >> Okay. So for let's do an example. Let's maybe say that we had a c 1 3 point 07 b c 7 a b and then 0 1 0 1 0 1 0 0 0 and so on. Okay, let's say that this is all just zeros. In this case, we say let's ignore everything before the last A. So everything before the last a gets cut off and ignored. And now you ask what is the decimal number in this value? >> Run of digits. >> Exactly. I mean there's no run of digits in >> there's no. So it's just going to be zero. So we're going to put a means it's a positive number. I'm going to put zero. And then the b is going to be the decimal point. And now I'm just going to take this and put it here as my decimal. So this is now a number in decimal expression just as we're you know used to it. >> You've created a new number. >> A new number. >> Yeah. >> Yes. And it's uniquely determined, right? Because I have this kind of a weird algorithm for it. >> Yeah. >> It's not what you'd expect. It's not x² + 3, but it's an algorithm that takes a number and returns a value. >> And I could run this process on any real number. >> Any real number. >> Yeah. Yeah. like pi or anything. >> Exactly. >> Yeah. >> So now if maybe instead of this a I had c and some digits and then b and then only digits I'm going to use this to to say minus. So that will give me negative numbers right? So if I had 773 49 a point and then let's do something less confusing maybe 7 C B A C and that's going to be our final C and let's put here 49 B and then [Music] repeating then again now I have this C and That's the last time C appears and then I have finely many decimals B and then only decimals. So now again all of this gets ignored and this C becomes minus and here we have 49.141414 repeating again I took a number in base 13 and I created a number in base 10. What Conway's function does with this? Oh, I should actually tell you what happens if I have just an infinite sequence of A's or B's or maybe it doesn't fit into that just zero. I don't care any value. What happens now is that if I look at the real numbers and let's say this was any number A, this was any number B and they have their you know expansions in whatever base. Wherever I pick a number here, I can find something very close to it that can take an arbitrary value that looks like stuff here and then any real number. So if I have the the number pi will appear will be the value assigned here to a lot of different points get pi and a lot of different points get square root of two. I can put any number in base 13 into this function and it will spit out decimal numbers like you showed me. But it won't be unique. Like there there are all sorts of different real numbers that could all give me the same decimal number. >> Exactly. And not only that, pick any number you'd like. You can find arbitrarily close to it. Can very very close and even closer than that things that will give you your, you know, chosen real number. So pi will get a lot of values. So now if we try to graph this, right? And so let me put here you know the y axis. Okay. So I'm going to ask uh this number here maybe got this value. But now >> what are our axes here by the way? Are these this is a base this is a base 13 or what? >> Yeah. This is the x and the y. >> Yeah. >> Right. The real number is not the decimal. Right. The map is not the territory. The menu is not the food. This video is not me. It's a faximile of me. These are just the real numbers and you say okay let me pick this point convert it to base 13 see what's the value right maybe here next to it there's something that is mapped to zero which lies on this axis and then wait a minute I can be very very close to it and get this value and this value and this value and this value and this value all of these values appears as close as I want and then even closer than that and even closer and even closer and even closer. So if you zoom out a little bit, you actually just colored the entire plane by the graph of this function. You say zoom out a bit. You'd have to zoom out infinitely to color the whole plane. >> Well, you have to zoom in to see that it's kind of separate, right? That is where you zoom in. But if you look at this kind of from far away and how far doesn't really matter actually because it's so fractal like you colored everything to our human perception that doesn't have this infinite resolution. It looks like it just colored everything. >> If I had infinite resolution I would get closer to seeing the fractal nature. >> Yes. >> Whatever that means. >> Yeah. And in fact, if you understand the the concept of a measure, which assigns a volume, which in this case means an area, almost everything is mapped to zero. The part that goes to nonzero numbers is negligible. >> Oh, cuz you said discard those numbers that don't work. And most numbers don't work. >> Most of them don't work. Yeah. Almost every if you pick a number at random almost definitely it will be mapped to zero. It's not going to work. >> But still if I pick any real number in base 13 >> Mhm. >> I'm I'm ridiculously infinitely close to being able to turn into pi using the Conway algorithm. >> Yeah. Now base 13 and when you tell that to especially mathematicians go oh base 13 13 is prime 13 is important here. It's not. It's just easy because with base 13, you get back a decimal in base 10. But I can start in base 10 and then convert that into base 7 expansions. And I can start in base 7, convert to base 4. And I can start in base five and convert it to binary. >> There just needs to be a difference of three between your bases >> only because you want the plus, minus, and and the point, right? And you can also do all kind of things and say like well okay look at this value that you're discarding and use that to determine this and that. So you can really just think of this as even one more or two more should be enough. Uh so it it's definitely not about 13 just makes it really nice. >> I have never really been worried about whether something was trivial or not. Uh well no that's not true. I was worried you know in my early 20s let's say uh people always thought that I would you know be a great mathematician and be good at various things and so on and in my late 20s I hadn't achieved any of the things that people were predicting
