# Entirely Ridiculously Big Numbers - Numberphile

Источник: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SAtFZPtbMpI
Канал: Numberphile

So, this is an entirely ridiculously ridiculously big number. You've spoken to me about bigger numbers. I have spoken to you about bigger numbers, but I've never held one in my hand. I thought we might talk about Rubik's Cubes today, but not about this Rubik's Cube. Instead, how about that Rubik's Cube? Oh, that's got that's got more cubes in it. Yeah, that's What do you call the the elements of a So, the opinions are divided. I think what most people nowadays call it is a cubie, but I'm a bit old school and I call it a cubelet. Yeah. And that's got more cubelets. It's got more cubelets. You you can see it's six cubelets wide, while your your your classic is three cubelets wide, right? So, you might call this a six cube. So, the standard three cube has got an awful lot of scrambles, lots of different possibilities. Do you remember how many different scrambles, Brady? I believe 10 seconds ago, before we started the filming, you told me it was 43 quintillion. 43 quintillion on your the standard Rubik's Cube. >> That's Surely it's not a rounded all zeros. Is there like a more exact number than that? >> more exact, yeah. What's the exact number? Uh I don't remember, I'm afraid. I'll put it on the screen. There it is. And what does that number refer to? So, it's the number of different possible scrambles or different possible states it could be, different ways it can be mixed up, including of course the unscrambled solved state. Is this one of those situations where there are like, you know, reflections and mirrors and the same ones exist multiple times and you have to do that or Yes, that's right. So, we want to make sure when we're counting different states, we're not overcounting by counting um ones which look identical um to each other. In fact, this is going to be more important than with this, because you can see it's got all these center pieces. And if they get jumbled up between themselves, it doesn't matter, right? It's it's still going to be the same state. So, we won't have to worry about that, yeah. >> So, if you swapped two of those whites with each other, I wouldn't know. Exactly. So, we can't we should count them as that as being the same the same state. But I thought it might be fun to try and work out how many different states there are for a big cube like this. Okay, so I'm actually having said that, I think it's best to start with a slightly smaller cube. So, I'm actually going to start with this cube here, two cube. And it's going to be actually easier to do the calculation for cubes with even width. The question is, how many different states are there for this? So, this is a 2 by 2 cube. Let's scramble it up a little bit. You can see there are eight cubelets, right? And there are eight positions that a cubelet could be in, right? So, you can put any of the cubelets in any of the positions. So, let's just pick a slot, maybe this one here, that position, then there's eight choices of which cubelet to put it in. So, we can write that down, eight. And then once we've got that one, for the next slot, there's seven choices, right? So, it's times seven. And then for the next one, there's six and so on. So, you can see how it's going to go. The number of choices is 8 * 7 * 6 * and so on down to 1, which is usually written as 8 factorial with an exclamation mark. That's what that exclamation mark means, okay? So, that's the start, but that's not the whole answer, because once we've decided maybe we put this white, green, and red uh cube cubelets into this slot, it can actually be one of three ways round. So, if you just look at concentrate on that cubelet, if I do that, it's in the same position again, but it's in a different it's been rotated, right? And we can do it again, okay? So, actually there's um for each each of these cubelets in each of these positions, it can be one of three ways round, right? We need to multiply by three for each of these. So, you think it's going to be times three to the eight, right? Because there's eight of them. But actually it's not times three to the eight, because it turns out that once seven of them have been fixed, the the the final one is automatically fixed. You can't do anything more with it. So, it's actually times three to the seven. So, that's the the number of states for the two cube. Well, maybe not quite, because this point we have to rewind and think about every cube's favorite thing, the one cube. And the question is, how many states does the one cube have, right? And I think the what feels like the natural answer is it's got one state, yeah? But of course, I mean you could argue that it's got 24 states, because you think, okay, which which face will I put on the top? I'll put the the white face on the top. Um and then which face should I put on the front? So, it could be the orange one or the green one and so There's four choices there. So, you could argue that the one cube has got 24 states, 6 * 4, yeah? But we probably don't want that. We probably want to count them all as being the same, which means we need to Likewise for this, a lot of these states are going to be the same, but just rotations without actually doing any Right, so let me call this number we've got so far C, okay? I'll explain why it's called C in a moment. That's around about 88 million. But then to get the number of states for the two cube, we need to divide that by 24, okay? So, the two cube is C divided by 24. The answer is that's about 3.6 million, just for this little cube, okay? Wow. When we think about uh the bigger cubes, so I mean the one I'll do next is the four cube, because it's easier to work with um even sides. With a two cube, all the cubelets are basically equivalent, right? Any can go in the position of any other. That's not the case with here. Um in fact, there's three different types of cubelets here. You've got the corners, and you've got the edges here, and then you've got the centers. You've got three different types. And to work out the number of states for the four cube, what we need to do is work out the number of possible arrangements of the corners and the number of possible arrangements of the edges and the number of possible arrangements of the centers and then multiply them together. That's that's the plan. And I want to start with the two cube, because the corners of the four cube in or indeed the corners of any cube are basically exactly the same argument as for the two cube, because of this is these are corners, right? The first thing for the four cube, we need C again, that same number, right? So, the next thing to think about is the edges. So, for this cube, the sort of overall shape the the the cubic shape has got 12 edges and along each edge there's two cubelets, right? So, we've got 24 edge pieces. So, we've got 24 in total. And you can put one in any of the slots. So, we've got 24 slots. So, for the first slot, we've got 24 choices of cubelets. So, 24. And then for the next slot, we've got 23 and so on. You can see how it's going to go. It's going to be 24 factorial. Actually, that's it for the edges, because you might think, well, we also need to consider the fact that one edge can be either way up. But actually it can't in the sense that um once you fit a fix a slot to put this uh this edge piece in, it can only go one way up in it. The mechanics of the puzzle mean that. So, I'm just going to put a dot on this edge. And now I can flip those two edges there. So, don't worry about the other pieces, just look at those two edge pieces. So, I flipped them over, yeah? But you can see in flipping them over, I've also moved the one that was here to the one that was there. The one with the dot was there before, now it's there. Um and it's always going to be that way. So, once you've put the cube the cubelet in the slot, that's it. So, that is the that is the arrangement for the edges, okay? So, the number of edge arrangements is just that, it's it's just 24 uh which actually is a pretty big number. This is around uh six times 10 to the 23. So, that's 620 sextillion. The next thing is the centers. Again, it sort of starts off as the same as the edges, because we've got six faces of the cube. Inside each face, we've got four center pieces. There's 24 center pieces all together. So, I'm going to call this I'm going to call this number K, which is because C was already taken. The number of we can just pick a a slot here and then the number of choices of which center piece to put in it is 24. And then pick another one and the next one is 23 choices. So, it's going to be 24 factorial again. But this time we do have to consider something else, which is that these four cubelets are identical to each other. And if they mix around between themselves, we don't really care, right? We don't consider it as a different scramble if you know, if I was to swap those two or something. It's all it's all the same. So, that means every possible scramble is going to have basically um different versions of it where the orange centers are swapped around. So, that's an overcount at the moment. So, we have to correct that. How many how many um times is each one counted? Well, how many arrangements are of these four centers are there? Well, there's four choices for which one to put there times 3 times times 1, so 4 factorial, which is 24, okay? Yeah. So, we need to divide by So, this to get the number of total arrangements of all the centers in the cube, we need to divide by 24. Well, that's for the orange centers, okay? And then we have to do the same thing for the green centers and for the yellow centers. So, we have to divide by 24 six times. So, we divide by by to the six. And that gives us the number of arrangements of the centers. This comes out to be around 3 * 10 to the 15, which is 3 quadrillion if you like those sorts of words, okay? Okay, so now we can all to work out the number total number of possible states of the 4 cube, we just have to multiply those together, okay? So, we've got the number of possible arrangements of the corners, C, times the number of possible arrangements of the edges, E, times the number of possible arrangements of the centers, K. And then we have to divide by 24 for the same reason as previously, right? Okay, so that's the answer and that gives us a total answer here of uh roundabout 7 * 10 to the 45. So, that's the number of possible states of a 4 cube. How does that differ from our 3 cube, that that number that I was supposed to remember? >> [laughter] >> Septillion. 43 quintillion. Quintillion, that's it. 43 quintillion. How does it differ? Is it What sort of magnitude is that? For the standard cube, it's 4.3 * 10 to the 19. And now we've jumped up to 7 * 10 to the 45. So, it's a very substantial increase, okay? Really significant increase. Yes. Shall we have another substantial increase? Always. Okay, this is now a 6 cube. We can get started because the corners are exactly the same as previously. So, we start with the same number C. So, now we think about the edges. So, there's two fundamentally different kinds of edges on this cube, right? You've got the ones here which are uh blue and yellow and you've got the ones which are yellow and green. They're like They're in two sort of different types of corridors, aren't they? They're in two corridors and you can never switch between the corridors. So, once you're in one corridor, you're always in that corridor. The central edges are different from sometimes they're called wing edges, right? If you're in one of the wing edges, you can get to anywhere else in any of the other wing edges. And if you're in one of the central edges, you can get to anywhere else in any of the central edges, okay? What that Can the one on the left Can can you If you're in a central edge, like those two, can you change between left and right? You can. Yes, you can. >> So, you're not stuck in your corridor, you're stuck in your brand of corridor. >> You're You're stuck in your brand of corridor, yeah, exactly. That's right. That's right. Um And what What that means is that if you just look at the central edges, the um the argument is exactly the same as the edges for the 4 for the 4 cube, right? Because the the the edges here are just the central edges, right? So, the the number of possibilities for the central edge is that number E as we had before, right? So, times E. But then the number of possibilities for the wing edges is the same again, so it's times E again. So, we times by E squared. Okay, so now we've got to look about the centers. They call it centers. It means everything [clears throat] which isn't a corner or an edge. So, actually quite a lot quite a lot of cubes cubelets in here. There's um there's sort of 16. What are the What's the sort of corridor structure? How can you get Which can you get between and which can't you? Yeah, how are they constrained, yeah? How How are they constrained? Yeah. If you look at this white white cubelets, right? The question is where can it get to? So, it can on this face, there's four places it can sort of obviously get to, right? Those four. So, it can be just above the bottom left corner, just to the right of that corner, just underneath that corner, right? So, there's four four places it can get to. Are there any others? And actually the answer is no. So, you might think you would be able to get it get the white cube into that position there, but actually you can't. And likewise, you can't get it down there. That's sort of maybe more believable. And you can't get it there either. Just use a different face. So, actually the sort of key thing here is if you look at this blue square of four cubelets, those are the four fundamentally different kinds of centers. So, there's four kinds of centers. And then for each kind of center, the argument goes exactly as the centers for the 4 cube, okay? So, the number of ways of arranging those kinds of centers is that number K we had. And then the number of ways of arranging those kinds of centers is also K, and those kinds of centers are also K. So, overall we get K to the 4. Then of course, we do divide by 24, which matters less and less as these >> [laughter] >> numbers get bigger and bigger. It's a bit of a formality at this point. But when you work that out, we're up to 1.6 * 10 to the 116. We're like beyond atoms in the universe. We're beyond atoms in the universe. Yeah, there's there's more possible scrambles of this puzzle than there are atoms in the universe. This is my biggest cube. Um it's a recent and rash purchase. Um this is a 10 cube. And I haven't actually yet dared properly scramble it cuz I dread to think how long it would take me to solve. Um at some point I will. Um So, but I think it might be fun to work out how many I mean, has it gotten to a point now where for even numbered cubes, we can create an algorithm here or Yeah, we can. We can. So, the way to think about it is let's call it a 2n cube, right? So, um I'll do this as an example. So, a 2 * 5 cube, so that's my 10 cube, right? We're going to let n be sort of half the size. You could let n equal 10, but then the algebra comes out harder. You've got C, that's the number of corners, that never changes. Okay, now we think about the edges. How many different edges have we got? Now, let's put some different colors on. Okay, but the point is how many different types are there? Well, there's the central ones, then the next ones out, then the next ones out, and then the wings, okay? So, we've got four, right? 1 2 3 4 fundamentally fundamentally different types of edges. Um and in general, so here in this cube, n equals 5. So, in general, you're going to have n minus 1. Yeah? And the reason it's n minus 1 is because n is half the width of the cube, and we just don't want the the outermost ones, so so n minus 1, yeah? Okay? So, that means the number of possible arrangements of the edges is E to the n minus 1. And now we've got to think about the centers. Yeah, just give me a second. Sorry, it's just a bit slow, this thing. So, now if we think about the centers, this white square of 16 cubelets, that's representative of the different corridors. So, each of those is different to each of the others. You can never get from any of one of those to any of the others. And once we've chosen one of those types, so there's 16 types here, um or in general, that's n minus 1 squared, half the width, so that's n, then we take away the edge, so that's that width there is n minus 1, then we square it, okay? So, there's n minus 1 kinds of centers. That kind, by the way, is my justification for using K. Um pretty weak, I think. And then the argument for each one is exactly as the previous day, that's the number of possible combinations. So, we need to then multiply here by K to the n minus 1 squared, right? And K, remember, is 3 * 10 to the 15. And that's why you can sort of see here why these numbers are getting so big so quickly cuz it's exponential in n, but it's not actually just exponential in n, it's exponential in n squared. And that's why why it gets so big. Of course, we have to go through the formality of dividing by 24. Of course. Of course, of course. Um Okay. >> that does knock one off the power, doesn't it? It It knocks one off the power, yeah. It knocks one off the power. Um so, for 10, if you plug in um n equals 5 into this, well, you get C times E to the 4 times K to the 4 squared, so 16, divided by 24. Work it out, you get to 10 to the 349 or thereabouts, okay? Which is a which is really ridiculously ridiculously big number. I mean, that's the sort of place where, you know, if you took every atom in the universe and replaced it with a whole universe, and then repeated that four times, and then counted the number of atoms in that whole thing, this has still got more scrambles than that, right? Okay, so it's it's an entirely ridiculously ridiculously big number. You've spoken to me about bigger numbers. I have spoken to you about bigger numbers, but I've never held one in my hand. >> [laughter] >> You may have noticed we've only dealt with cubes with an even number of pieces along the edges. If you want to find out how it gets a bit more technical and mathematical with an odd number, like that, >> [music] >> go and have a look on Numberphile 2. We've got an extension of the video there. We go into way more detail, but before you do that, go and order one of these. Order a copy of Huge Numbers. It's Richard's new book. It's available now to order or pre-order, depending on where you are. The cover might look different, depending on where you are, but it's a fantastic read. It deals with really big numbers, like you've been seeing just now. I'll also put some links below to other things that may interest you, previous videos we've done about Rubik's Cubes, previous videos we've done about big numbers, and of course, the link to that extra video, and the order link for Richard's book. Go and check it out, people. Thanks for your time, and thanks for watching. puzzle can be [music] solved in 20 or 15
