# Glitch Primes and Cyclops Numbers - Numberphile

Источник: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HPfAnX5blO0
Канал: Numberphile

This is really exciting. I I posted something on Twitter uh a while ago about a really crazy number with a lot of a lot of digits that are all the same and it got a really huge response. I just want to share with you my experience with this number. Let me draw the number for you. 12 13 Here we go. and in the words of Andrew Wilds, I think I'll stop there. This number here, all nines, you can see it. In actual fact, the way that you'd uh you describe this is as a rep digit. So in the maths cannon you'd say rep digit meaning repeated digit. But what's special about this uh there's two things really special about this number is that here down here there's one digit that's changed. So it's not a rep digit. Uh it's called a near rep digit. So it's just really close. But you know what I like to call it Brady? I like to call it a glitch. I feel like it's a glitch because it's not only a glitch number. Believe it or not, this is a prime number. This here, I posted this on Twitter. It really got people going. But you know what I thought, Brady? I thought, you sure they haven't made a mistake? I'd really like to check this number. You know, uh, as a mathematician, that's what you want to do. You want to check it. The only problem is, how do you check a number like this? I I really don't suggest you stick this into the the Google entry line to actually work out if it was a prime or not. I actually needed to compactify it. I mean, I needed to actually go I needed to actually transform it into something that I could carry around. So, this number has 56 digits. And so the eight here is actually if you count from the bottom from the ones column and the 10's column and the hundreds column if you get up you'll actually get to the 254th column. So it's actually 254 along. So it's just over the halfway. How can we actually transport this in a way that doesn't involve me writing out all these 9ths? Any ideas? What's really cool about it is the fact that they are nines. So if you add 1 to 9, you get a 10. And if you add 1 to 99, you get 100. And if you add 1 to 999, you get a,000. So we can actually use that fact because if we can actually get this as something to the power of 10, well, that can really make things a lot easier for us to handle. So if we think about it, right, this has 506 nines. So if we say 10 take 1 is 9, 10 squared take 1 which is 100 take 1 is 99 and 10 cubed which is three zeros there take 1 is 999. Then if we go dot dot dot and you got to love the dot dot dots cuz you can put anything in dot dot dots. We can then say 10 to the 56 take 1 is equal to let's just jump to the chase. Hey Brady is equal to 999 dot dot dot 999 where this happens to be 56 digits. Y. So that's kind of that except for that. I know it's a small change, but that actually changes the value of the number quite a lot, doesn't it? What do you mean changes the value? The quantity. Like if if you were going to buy that many eggs, you were going to put this into eggs. Changing that from an eight for changing that from a nine to an eight dramatically change the number of eggs you just bought. Well, you know what? You're exactly right. And to actually work out by how much you're actually solving the problem. 9 take 8 is 1 and 90 take 80 that's 10. 900 take 800 is 100. Can you see the pattern going on here? So if we actually think there's a 9 right there in the 254th position. So what would that mean? That means that we're actually taking away one with this many zeros. So we got to imagine there's a one here and then it's got all for every nine there's basically a zero cuz that's continuing what's going on here. So now what we're doing is we go 10 to the 5 06 take 1 gives us this c of 9 and then we just want to take one with a whole bunch of zeros to kind of get it up to that point there. So we're basically taking away 10^ the 253. So that's what that's equal to. So, it's that take one to give us the nines. Take that to take one away from that spot. So, yeah. So, I found a way to actually carry it around and talk to your This is the way you talk to big numbers, big prime numbers like this to your friends. You don't go 9999999 some sort of Ali G reference. 99999, which is interesting. In actual fact, Ali G does this thing where he goes, "Uh, what's 99999? Take 9999999 8999. Actually, he actually does this. And I actually counted the number of times he said nines and eights. 8 999. And it's unbelievable. He's like one off, one place off actually having one of these glitch primes. That would have really made the nerds excited. So now what we have is a way to actually understand this number. So now we have uh 10 to the 56 take and I'm just going to order it in terms of uh magnitude here. Take that uh take that. Basically what you what you need to notice here what's going on is the fact that if you double 253 253 guess what you get 2 3's are 6 2's are it's actually that number. So now we can actually find a structure. I'm going to put in a couple of letters here to to denote other things. I can actually make it even smaller. If you check this out, maybe not because in actual fact for M. Don't you love mathematicians? Let's just make it more more complicated. So, natural fact it actually has this shape. So, what happened next? I started doing this at 9:00 p.m. I mean, I was I was still doing it at 6:00 a.m. I mean, I was going down. This is the hole I want to take you down. So now what's really interesting is that if you if you learn about how to factoriize polomials or even you know factoriize things because this is actually 10 m squared take 10 m take 1. So you kind of get this taught at school you know it actually has the shape of x^2 take x take 1. So you could actually think oh maybe I'm going to be able to work out a way to see when this is a prime or not. But see this is what's amazing about these primes. primes don't act that way. In actual fact, I needed to put this number into like a database that would crunch it for me. And you wouldn't believe there's only a small number of M's which will actually give you this particular shaped glitch prime. And they happen to be the values of m where m is equal to 1 6 9 hello 1,114 and 1,390. [Music] And that's as far as the database went. And I think that's probably as far as we know at this point for this particular. So look at that. Think about how big this number is. How many values of m you can have. And it's only for these numbers that this will be prime. And that happens to be prime. What's cooler than just a glitch? No glitch. Well, maybe. But maybe also what happens if the glitch was right in the middle of the number? So I actually looked into that as well. So that's a different formula. So that formula then is we're saying it's uh 10^ the 2 m + 1 take 10 m take 1. It basically has to be an odd number of digits. Not an odd number but in terms of the number of digits it has to be an odd number cuz it has to have a middle. So there are lots of different values for that but there's actually a really nice value. The first one we can find is actually m= 9. And so what it looks like is 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 and nine and then 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9. So it's nine nines eight nine nines. Come on swish. But see, I looked at this and I thought glitch. What are glitches? We think glitches, we think, we think computers, we think binary. So really, where this took me to was like, I'm looking at these glitch primes the wrong way. I should be looking at binary glitch primes. So I want to look at binary numbers. So in that fact, in that case, I'm looking at instead of nines, I'm looking at 1111 glitch 1111. And and also, let's just think about the coolest thing, a palendrome. And they've actually got a special name. They're called cyclops numbers. So, for example, five is 1 0 1. Cyclops cuz it's got a hole in the middle. But you got lots of other Cyclops numbers. I mean, I don't even have to work it out. You could have like two 1's and a zero and two 1's, whatever that is. Or you could have three 1's and a zero. Three 1's. Or you could have like four and a zero and four. I mean, this is getting, you know, we're really I mean, this is the sort of stuff you communicate with aliens about, you know what I mean? Five is prime. Are those other ones prime? Well, that was my question. I wanted to know if other ones could be prime. And this is really where my mind was blown because I then had to change the structure of this thing here. It's 10 because it's base 10. But if we actually do it like this. So if then if it's 2 m cuz we're basically doing it in binary. So that just means that we need to do it in in power two. Right? What that means is this is unbelievable. I'm able to actually factoriize this into 2 m + 1 + 1 to 2 m take 1. So you're always able to do that because it's two. You can't do that with any other number higher than two. And this is a problem because guess what? Primes by definition don't have any factors. They don't have any factors. It's just only divisible by themselves and one. So if you can actually turn this always into this, the only time this is not going to be a prime is when one of these things is equal to one. So this is getting added. It has to be 2 m take 1 = 1. So then that means it's 2 m = 2. Well, come on. It's m = 1. So that means it's uh that means the only prime we have is 2 ^ 2 + 1 5. So where this took me unbelievable. the morning, the sun's rising, and I realize, maybe I'm the first person to realize, I'm not really, but that's how I feel about maths, that the only glitch prime you can have in binary is 101. We'd like to thank audible.com for their support of this number file episode. If you want to enjoy a book or other spoken material, Audible has everything you could wish for. They've got over 180,000 titles to choose from, and they're offering a 30-day free trial when you sign up for the service. Now, if you're in the mood for some more mathematics, I can highly recommend these books on the screen, including Alex's Adventures in Numberland and The Mathematics of Love, both by people who appear in Number File videos. Or if all this talk about Cyclops has you excited, why not go old school and listen to none other than The Odyssey by Homer. Not that Homer. If you do check out Audible, and I highly recommend it, I use Audible myself, then use the URL audible.com/numberfile. That means if you do take them up on that free trial, the good people there will know you came from here. That's audible.com/numberfile. And our sincere thanks to them for helping us make more number file
