# How to Win a Guessing Game - Numberphile

Источник: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ud_frfkt1t0
Канал: Numberphile

What we have here are two bits of card. On the bottom of it, I'm going to ask you to write down two different numbers. They can be any numbers at all. They've just got to be different. And I've actually called them for you already. A and B, but they're two different numbers. They could So, it could be it could be a million. It could be 10. Yeah. It could be 0001. It could be a half. It could be pi or e or anything like that. Just two numbers. and you're going to put them face down. And you can't have imaginary numbers. They've got to be say real numbers. What I'm going to do, I'm going to just decide to overturn one of them. So this one here, say, and I'm going to tell you with more than 50% chance of me being correct whether this one is bigger, the upturned one is bigger than the one that's face down. Now, you would have thought that this would be absolutely impossible because surely, you know, I only have a 50-50 chance. I've got these two numbers here. One's bigger than the other, and I've got 50/50 chance of picking each one. You know, we, you know, obviously we put A and B, but they're going to have two different values. So, it depends what you've put as A and B. It depends which one I chose is just 50/50. Um, but there is a fantastically ingenious way that puts the odds in my favor that means I will win this game over half the time. What I'm going to do and the way that this works is that I myself am going to generate another number completely randomly and I've done one already and I'm going to call it K. Okay. So, what I'm going to do now is I'm going to look at the number that's been revealed a. If the number that's been revealed is bigger than my random number, I'm going to say A is the biggest number. If A is smaller than K, the random number, I'm going to say no, no, this one here, the one that's unrevealed, the hidden number, is the biggest number. And just by doing this, I can guarantee that statistically my odds are much well are better than 50/50. So it's more likely than not that I will be correct in determining whether the revealed or the hidden card which one is bigger. K is a randomly generated number. You the mathematical small print so to speak is that I need to take it from a distribution that covers all the numbers. So for example the normal distribution um you know you can set the um the mean and the standard deviation. It just needs to come and you can get this on the internet. I just need to generate a number which could possibly be there is a chance no matter how small of it being any number and we can do this five. So anyway this is K. If we were playing this game for real Alex, how would you have generated K? Would you have gone over to your computer? Yeah, I would have gone over to computer. I would have Googled random number generator normal distribution. I would have put the mean, the standard deviation and I would have got something. And because you know we're humans, we're you could be clever and clever and say this is going to be a Google, this is going to be a Google times a Google. Most people are going to say this is number between one and 100. This is probably a number between one and 100. And so I would put with my um you know the mean would be 50 and you know standard deviation 20 something like that. So why does this work? Now let's consider values of K. And in fact what I'm going to do I'm going to reveal this A and B. There are three different possible scenarios. Either K is less than both A and B or K is bigger than both A and B or I have managed to get K I've hit the spot is between A and B or it could be like that because we don't know which one's bigger. Basically K is in is in between. And so what I'm going to show now this is down is that if k is lower as I said I'm going to choose a always I stick with a and because we know that both of these numbers are bigger than k. So because k is lower it's still 50/50 chance if k is bigger I flip. So in both cases where my number K that's randomly generated is either less than both of A and B or bigger than both of A and B then the odds are still 50/50. When it makes a difference is just say that K is in between A and B because if K is in between A and B I always win. I always know which is biggest. So if I say A is biggest then I know I'm right because K has to be less than A. we know that K is in between. So I'm right. But if A is less than K, we know that K is in between A and B. So I would be choosing B and I would also be right because B is bigger than A. So just by this random generation of a number that has absolutely nothing to do with the numbers that you chose and you wrote here. If it so happens that this number K is in between these two numbers, both scenarios, I am correct. Alex, it feels like the bigger the gap between A and B that I left when I wrote down the numbers to start with, the greater I was increasing your chances. Correct? So, if you knew that I was doing this, you could try and make it as difficult as possible for me to get the edge by choosing an A and a B that are really, really close together. But so long as I'm choosing from a distribution where all numbers are game, there's a slight chance of choosing any number, I have the edge. I always have the edge. Obviously, if you choose big numbers, you know, if you were to choose minus a th00and and plus a thousand, I would pretty much win every time. So yeah, the the larger the gap, the easier, you know, it's like the the wider the goal to use a football metaphor, the wider the goal. I said I haven't actually done this as an experiment, but I imagine if I was to tell you put two numbers down, you're probably going to say something like, I don't know, 12 and 30. You know, that's kind of quite a reasonable thing that you're going to do. Most people would probably choose not a digit. that seems a bit too small. But in a hundreds, that's just like too complicated. You probably do something between, say, 10 and 50. So if I'm, you know, if I'm put my distribution so that it's heavily picking up those numbers between 50, I'd say that you play this game a 100 times, maybe there's someone who actually wants to run the simulations. I I wager that it would actually be you'd be winning a not just more than 50, but a significant amount more than 50% of the time. I guarantee you one thing, Alex. I guarantee you there will be number five viewers who run this simulation. I can't wait. I can't wait. Even if I'm proved wrong.
