# Immense Subcubic Graph Numbers - Numberphile

Источник: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4-eXjTH6Mq4
Канал: Numberphile

So today I'd like to talk about um some interesting numbers called subcubic graph numbers. Before we get to the numbers I have to talk about what subcubic graphs are. First of all explain what a simple graph is. And it's a pretty simple thing. It's just a bunch of dots we call nodes and then some of them might be joined to each other by lines we call edges. Some might not. Something like that. So that's an example of a a graph. With graphs, the only important thing is which nodes are joined to which other nodes. So there's no idea of position. Nodes don't have a location and edges don't have a length or anything. It's just which nodes are joined to which other nodes. Okay. So that's a a a graph. To make it a simple graph, we have to impose a couple of extra rules. One is that you not allowed to have one node joined to itself by an edge. And the other thing is we're not allowed to have two nodes joined by parallel edges. Any two nodes are joined by at most one edge. Okay? Okay. So that's what a a simple graph is. >> Okay. I'm with you so far. >> Excellent. So I want to explain um what it means for one simple graph to be hiding inside another one. So if we take a graph, just a triangle graph and we'll have another one over here. So we might have something like this. It's got a few extra bits and pieces. But it's sort of fairly obvious that you can find this one hiding here, right? You there's a copy of the first one in the second one. But there's a little bit more to it than that, which is that this first graph, the triangle is also hiding. If we sort of take one of its edges and sort of pin a node halfway along it, that's also hiding in there. The technical term for this is being a topological minor, but I'm just going to say hiding. That's what it means for one simple graph to be hiding another. All the graphs we're looking at at the moment are sub cubic which means basically if you look at a node you can see 0 1 2 or at most three edges coming out of it not four not allowed to have four edges coming out of it. You can for a graph um but not for a subcubic graph. So I think that's the uh the basic setup now um for subcubic simple graphs and what it means for one to be hiding inside another. So then there's a challenge. I'm going to give ourselves a challenge of drawing a sequence of subcubic simple graphs and the rules as follows. The first one can have at most one node. The second one can have at most two. Third one can have at most three and so on. And the rule is that no graph can be hiding in any of the later ones. Okay. And then the question is how long a sequence can we build following those rules. Okay. >> Okay. >> Okay. And actually I mean it's not very interesting to start with. So the answer is if you got at most one node there's not a lot to play with. We've got one node, right? Or we could have zero then we stop. And the next thing we can do is just have this is my picture of the empty graph. Okay. The empty graph has got no nodes or edges. So we have to a single node graph and then an empty graph. And then there's no further we can go. we've done. Okay. Um, so that's not terribly exciting. And what I'll write here is S S C G0 equals 2. Uh, so simple sub cubic graph and then the zero we'll come back to in a moment is two because that's the longest sequence we could do. We could have made a shorter sequence. We could just put the the zero graph straight away. This is the longest one we can do. Okay. >> Okay. Okay. So that's the longest we could do with what with >> where where we start with at most one node and then at most two nodes and then at most three nodes. >> Why couldn't we do another one after that? Why couldn't >> because any ah yeah it's a good question because because any graph you could put here which has any nodes is going to have this first one hiding in it. >> Hiding and that's why that you can't put two there or anything cuz zero is hiding in it. >> Zero is hiding in anything afterwards. Even if there are no nodes anything which has got any nodes at all has got the first one hiding in it. That's why we've run out. Yeah. So then same thing again, but this times we give ourselves a head start. Okay. So this time I'm going to start with at most two nodes, then at most three nodes. >> So you've gotten rid of that >> and we could still put that one in here if we want. It's doesn't have to be two, but two is going to be a better option, right? >> You've gotten rid of that constraint. >> We've gotten rid of that constraint. I'm just increasing the constraints just by one. So this is going to be the subcubic graph number one. And what this one is, it's like a head start. So the best we can do here is going to give ourselves that graph to start with. We would be allowed to have put that one. But this is obviously a better choice because this is that's hiding in everything. This is still hiding in a lot. Right. So that's hiding in any graph which has got any edges. >> Yeah. >> So all the all the subsequent graphs can't have any edges. But we can still do something, right? We can have that, right? That's now three nodes, no edges. So this is not hiding in there. But now if we want to carry on, we can't have three nodes cuz that's going to be hiding in any graph which has got three or more nodes. So the best we can do now is go down to two and go down to one. And then finally we'll have our empty graph. So we go 1 2 3 4 5. So the SSCG1 is going to be five. So then the next question is going to I think it's obvious what we're going to do, right? We're going to look at this subcubic graph with a head start of two, right? So that means the first one's going to have three and the next one can have at most four and so on. So I we could get started. I mean quite a good choice a first choice. There's there's more choice here. There's lots of different things we could try but probably quite a good one to try is a put a triangle graph in here. Right. So what do you think Brady? How far do you think we carry on this sequence? >> You have caught me out before. I feel like it's not going to blow up too badly yet. >> Okay. Okay. Okay. >> I'm going to guess 27. >> 27. >> Yeah. >> Okay. >> That's just that's but not based on your mathematical. >> It's a bit little bit bigger than that. So actually the the best you can do here is bigger than 10 to the 10^ the 28. >> Go away. So it's it has blown up quite a long way. Do you know what the second graph in the sequence is that goes in the >> Well, I think it's this one here. Okay. A lot >> I can't believe that. >> So, a lot of the Google is a good word for this. It's a study of big numbers. A lot of the Google on this was done by a guy called Adam Goucher and this is his estimate. And >> so, it's not known the number. uh it is I mean I think it's well he he's constructed a sequence of greater than of this length um I don't think there's actually a proof that that is the longest possible so it might be even bigger but I think the general consensus is that um >> so so his sequence did end he he he did come to an end he just doesn't know if there's a longer one >> okay so that's that's a really that's a really good question so um the first and most important thing there is actually And maybe we'll come on to this in a little bit, but actually the sequences will always end. That's actually really important that that's the sort of deeper mathematics going under this is that you're not going to be able to um construct an infinite sequence of graphs which follow these rules. It's just not possible. So there's always going to be a longest one. Actually, that's even that's not actually automatic. You can imagine there might be um there might be sequences of arbitrarily long finite length, but that's also not true. So that there is definitely a maximum length and I think I think most people are pretty have looked at it are pretty convinced by Adam Goucher's answer that this is this is the the longest possible one. So that's SSCG2. So we can carry on and look at three. How big do you think that might be? And we could start with uh so it's going to start we need to have at most four and we could start with something like this. I think that's probably a promising one to start with. The next one's the most five and so on and so on. Uh what do you what do you think about that? How big that one might be? I'm going large. Um, >> it's going to be large. I mean, it's got to be bigger than 10^ the 10 to 28. >> I'm going to say this is your we don't know moment. >> Um, we know it's very very big. Uh, and by which I mean it's bigger than just about any number you could write down by any means. There's a famously enormous number called tree three. >> Yes, >> this this number is actually bigger than tree three. For the people who know about this, that's saying quite something, right? because that's a that's a famously huge number. Both of these actually were uh invented by the the sequences were invented by the same guy Harvey Freriedman who's an American logician who's sort of coincidentally he's done some stuff which has generated just bigger numbers than just about anyone else has come up with including these but he's done some really deep logic which underlies where where these numbers come from. So maybe maybe I'll come back to that in a little bit. So this is this is a really really really huge number this third subcubic graph number. Um, I know people always want to like make things bigger. So, there is actually a way we can slightly tweak it by making these even bigger. Can I have another sheet of paper? We're going bigger by ditching simplicity. So, we define simple graphs as being graphs where you're not allowed loops and you're not allowed parallel edges. So, we can do the whole thing that we just did but allowing those. So these are more general these are more general subcubic graphs still have to be subcubic and the notion of hiding inside is the same. Basically all the other rules are the same but we're just going to allow graphs with >> so in the first really early examples you showed me that didn't really become an issue anyway. >> Well you'll see I mean you can go so you can get slightly longer sequences once we allow sub cubic graphs. So so just going back to the first one. So less than equal to 1 less than equal to two less than equal to three. So actually if we've got one note, there's a bit more we can do now if we're allowed a loop because we can put one with a loop. Remember what hiding means? This will now mean we couldn't have any cycles. Okay? So there couldn't be any circuit where we come back. Otherwise you'd find this one hiding in it. But we can have two connected with a single edge and then we can then then after this point we can't have any edges at all. So you can have then three and then we're down to two and then one and then our our empty graph. So 1 2 3 4 5 6. So the first or the zeroth subcubic graph number is uh six. Okay. And just to remind myself, when when we had the other rule, it was two. >> It was two. Yeah. So So we've got bigger. We could ask what the next one is where we're allowed start with the most two. I don't know. I'm having fun asking you. So what do you think? So remember with when we were when we were in the simple world, you it was five. Okay. >> Okay. I'm going to go 139. >> Okay. It's a good guess, but uh you've underestimated again. >> Yes. I tend to do that with you. It's again um I mean we're already now in the realms of enormous numbers actually >> right >> so this is for example this is bigger than Graham's number >> no >> yeah so it's not as big as tree three but it is no by any ordinary numbers this is this is this is absolutely huge so it's obvious I think that the the general subcubic graph numbers are always going to be bigger than the simple subcubic graph numbers because you've still got the simple uh ones you can use them but then you can use more as Well, yeah, I'm going to skip two cuz we haven't got that much to say about that. But if you remember, SSGC3 was enormous, bigger than tree 3. This one's much much bigger than that again. And in fact, uh, so this is not only bigger than tree 3. Uh, it's bigger than tree of tree. So I I'll explain what that means. I mean there's we got the sequence the tree sequence which goes tree one, tree two, tree three and tree is this enormous number and then tree four, tree five, tree six and so on. This number I've written down here is tree of tree three. So it's the tree three entry in this uh this sequence. >> So the little number sitting next to the tree here happens to be true. >> Yeah. Yeah. And actually we can we can keep going. It's actually bigger than tree of that. >> Is it? >> It is. Yeah. How many times do you think we can do it? >> You always catch me out here. Tree three times. >> Oh, good guess. You can you can. So this we could write this one as tree cubed three. Yeah. And this number here is actually bigger than tree tree 3 of three. This is all based on uh Adam Goucher's work. >> When I said tree three times and you said oh good guess were you was that that number or was that >> no this is this number. >> Yeah. Yeah. So this is your number where so we're repeating this process applying the tree operator tree three times. This is numbers where it's very difficult to sort of say anything about the size because tree three itself is already you know far beyond the usual technology we use to write down big numbers. You know if you want to write a tower of tens this is far beyond that. We've got kuth which is really powerful notation but this is far beyond anything you can touch with touch with those. So the sub cubic graph number is you know another another level beyond that. Yeah. So these are really really seriously big numbers. >> They are serious. >> They are serious. Now sometimes um when you get sort of surprise appearance of really massive numbers, it's actually telling us something interesting. I mean it's fun. I mean we all like big numbers but um there's actually something under the surface here which is uh really mathematically important. Uh so I'm going to I guess I'm sort of switching from the Google. Google is sort of playing around with big numbers because it's fun and we love big numbers. But there's actually some really serious deep mathematics underlying that. And the key result here is a result called the graph minor theorem. So the graph minor theorem is this enormous u result in graph theory. Um it's proved by um Neil Robertson and Paul Seymour in a series of 20 papers. The most recent of which was um in 2004. Actually I've got a good quote from uh this book. So this is a textbook on graph theory by Reinhardt Dell s industry standard uh graph theory textbook. He says this result dwarfs any other result in graph theory and may doubtless be counted among the deepest theorems that mathematics has to offer. So it's like a really really serious bit of mathematics that the basic statement is whenever you've got some infinite collection of finite graphs right so I'm drawing lots of pictures of finite graphs and actually it doesn't matter whether we want to focus on simple graphs or whether we want to allow we might call multigraphs where you got the loops and parallel edges either way is fine but they got to be finite graphs so finite numbers of vertices finite numbers of edges So whenever you've got an infinite collection of them, you can always find a pair, let's call them A and B, somewhere in there where A is sort of hiding inside B or more technically A is a minor of B. And what it means to be a for one graph to be a minor of another is that from from B you can get A back firstly by deleting some edges, deleting some nodes, but also by contracting edges. So if we've got some sort of structure like this, then we can just sort of squeeze that edge away and merge these two vertices. Whenever you've got an infinite collection of finite graphs, you can always find um a pair such that one is a minor of the other. Meaning you can you can find a inside by um either deleting edges, deleting nodes or doing this edge contraction. Right? That's a slightly different notion of hiding inside than we had earlier. Um but actually earlier we were focusing on subcubic graphs and it turns out the two are the same for subcubic graphs. So I give that slightly easier formulation in general being a minor is the is the is the right notion. So I guess this is the point where I'm sort of going to delve into the logic a little bit if that's okay if you're happy. >> Let's do it. At the time of releasing this video, our channel sponsor Jane Street is taking applications for its next internship program. This is a chance to join one of their international teams. Perhaps launch your own career to somewhere really special. Jane Street's an international quantitative trading firm and they're on the lookout for bright and curious people. If you've got a brain for things like machine learning, software engineering, statistics, programmable hardware, research, all that good stuff, this might be your big opportunity. No finance experience is necessary, and Jane Street will cover any travel and accommodation costs, plus some pretty competitive compensation. Last time round, they took people from 100 different schools and 24 countries. Sounds like something you might like. Check out the details in the description at all the usual places below. [Music]
