# Let's Talk About Sets - Numberphile

Источник: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=y12Tt3bOmKA
Канал: Numberphile

What we're going to talk about today are sets of positive numbers. Okay? And a set is basically just a collection of positive integers. And what we're going to do is try to add sets together. So let's say we have a set that's called A. And we'll write the notation and I'll give an example. This set is uh 2 3 7. Let's have another example. We'll call it B. And we'll say that B is 1 5 8 and 9. What we want to do is add these two sets together. And so what do I mean by that? What we're going to do is add each number in the set pair-wise. So, I'll say that a + b is equal to 1 + 2, 1 + 3, 8 + 3 + 2, 9 + 3, and 9 + 7. Right? We have a new set and we would like to, you know, write out the the sums so that we actually know what our set is. So, let's say 12 and finally 16. Well, we have some repeated numbers here. So, we would like to just write the set in its actual form. So I just struck out the the repeated numbers that we had. So another thing worth noting here is that uh in our set A we had three members. In our set B we had four members and in our set the sum of A and B we had nine members. And this is something that I'll come up again. We can think of a special type of set that um I'll call arithmetic progression. So arithmetic regression could be p= 4 8 12 say 16 say 20. We add four each time to the the number before it and we have a progression and it's called an arithmetic progression because we added the numbers. What we'll do is we'll add P to itself and we'll see what happens and something kind of interesting kind of happens. And so again we have 4 + 4 4 + 8. We have this large uh set of sums here. And in fact the the actual set will be much smaller. 8 see 12 16 36 and 40. That's the final that's the final set. Came down quite a lot, didn't it? Is it normal for sets to come down that much? No, it's it's not normal. So, if we have a set of integers, uh we add all of the sums, we have you saw we had a lot of sums. In most cases, maybe there's not too much overlap. And in that case, we have something close to what we had originally, this whole large grid of sums. The nice thing about an arithmetic progression added to itself is that the the size of the sum set will be less than two times the size of the original original set. The sum set will never double the the size of the original set. What you'll end up having is that the size of P + P is always less than or equal to 2 times the size. And that's special. We can do it another example where we get pretty much the exact opposite. our size of P plus P is actually closer to what we expect with no overlap. So what we're going to do next are geometric uh sequences. I'll call it G this time. And this set will be 2 4 8 and 16. This is 2 to the 1 2 cubed and this is 2 to the 4. So I'll add G to itself. This a geometric sequence to itself. And what special about geometric sequences is that they're pair-wise sums. We have some overlap. We have some overlap here, but we don't have overlap as much as we do in the case of the arithmetic progression. So the size of G originally is size four and the size of G + G is now equal to 10. And so that's more than doubled. Yes, definitely more than double. Right? So now we have um the size of G + Greater than 2 times the size of G. And if we were to take a really large geometric uh sequence, we would actually see that G + G is about G ^2. The first thing is as a result from Paul Aerodyition and it's about it's a little bit about subsets. Okay. So let's say we take a set 2 3 and seven. We can define the notion of set being sum free. And what do I mean by sum free? I mean that if you take any pair of numbers in your set including the number itself add it to itself then the sum of the pair of numbers is not in the set. So let's look at a plus a. Yeah. And so this will be four 5 9 10 and 14. You see that no numbers are shared between these two sets. Okay. So a is some free. Are some free sets common or are they like a special rarity? Are they like prime numbers or are some free sets easy to find? You would think that they would be maybe uncommon, but in fact they're actually more common than you would imagine. So let's say you have any set, okay, any set of positive integers. What Paul Erdish said is that there exists a subset of that arbitrary set that you picked that is sum free and that subset is greater than a third of the size of the original set. Yeah, I have a favorite uh a fractal set. Let's say in uh that's it's it's inside of an interval of of real numbers. So let's say you have an interval of real numbers 0 to one. So we're not dealing with integers anymore. We're not dealing with integers anymore. We have a set of real numbers. What I would like to I guess construct is something that's called the caner middle third set. It's an iterative process. And the first step of the caner middle third set is you take the middle third out of the the interval 01. Okay? So you find the middle third of 01 and so this goes from 1/3 to 2/3 and you erase that that segment of the interval. What I have left is this set. Okay. Still infinitely big. Yeah, it's I mean if you just count the elements in the set, it's huge. It's uncountable. And so now the second step is to take the middle thirds out of the segments that we have left. So uh we take a third of this set and a third. And so we end up with something a little smaller. You do it again and you do it infinitely many times I suppose. And the last and the limit set that you end up with is called the caner middle third set. But you never get there. How would you ever get there? Well, you approximated. Basically, you say that it's you know the thing that if you get close enough or you take an arbitrarily large step in our our progression that'll be the closest set to it. That'll be the limit. How many numbers are in the can or middle third set? Well, there are count uncountably many. Okay. And so in some sense uh you know you can say that it's we haven't taken the size down any at any point but there is a way to measure how much we've taken away. In general we'll say that the interval I suppose is just a line. If we want to measure the dimension of the interval we can say that the dimension is one. Right? So the dimension just like the dimension of this piece of paper should be well it's not actually two right because it has some thickness but in some fantasy world it's two right we're in three dimensions right okay so the dimension of the line should just be one or the interval should be just be one and there's some way to measure the dimension of this caner 1/3 set and what I'll just say it here and I'll call it dimension in quotations and I'll say that the dimension of caner set log 2 over log Log three. Number five is brought to you by the Mathematical Sciences Research Institute, MSRI. That's the building behind me there. This is a place where many of the world's top mathematicians come together for sometimes a semester at a time, cracking some of the hardest problems in mathematics. If you'd like to find out more, I'll put some links in the description under the video.
