# Lord of the Commutative Rings - Numberphile

Источник: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1oqqpqaDgfI
Канал: Numberphile

The ring has awoken. >> So, I work a bit in commutive algebra, um, which is the study of, uh, commutive rings. And Brady, you were telling me you wanted me to tell you what those were. And so, that's what today's video is about. >> Rings. >> Rings. One of the basic constructions in abstract algebra. >> When someone's really good at communive algebra, does everyone like call them Lord of the Rings and things like that? >> No, not so much. At least I haven't heard of uh heard of that. Um that's maybe because it's one of it's such a fundamental concept right that um I think every mathematician deals with them at some at some stage. >> Is there one ring to rule them all? >> In some sense the answer I guess was is yes. So there is one ring which well it's initial. So it it really um uh sort of maps to everything and we'll understand some about it. But if I would say the rings that rule everything will show up at the end of the video. The rings I think are the most important and fundamental objects are are polomial rings. And we'll talk a little bit about it at the end. >> All right, let's go then. What's a ring? >> All right, so what is a ring? So a ring is an algebraic structure um with two operations that are very familiar to those that you've probably played around with um similar to what you've played around with um um before for when doing arithmetic for much of the rest of your life. So it has two operations both an addition and a multiplication and they have to satisfy many of the same properties that you already know and love from usual arithmetic. So I start off with a set or a collection are with two operations addition and multiplication. For example, addition is a way of taking two things given any two uh numbers in the set or two elements of the set. I can add them and it produces another number. And what are some of the rules that govern how we can combine them? Well, if I have three of them, it's associative. So, it doesn't matter which order you add the three in any way. There is a a number that's special with respect to addition so that you can add it to anything zero and you get back what you started off with. That zero in some sense is your home for addition. Right? So, and given anything you have to be able to come back home. there's some number associated to any element a so that minus a and a add together to give the the identity zero right and then the last one that the order of the addition doesn't matter and these axioms here right so again all four of these things that I've written down are all just the rules for addition there's a multiplication again that uh also has a very similar set of rules but maybe uh they're just fewer of them given any two elements in my set I have to be able to multiply multiply them to produce another number. If I have three of them, multiply them in any order, you have to get the same thing. There is a special one, right? So that anything times the special one which I call one again gives me back what I started off with. I don't have the next rule, right? Where you have to be able to get home with this operation. It's less restrictive than with addition. Um, and sort of what makes it commutive, you can define rings that are not commutive as well. And in that case you would just omit this next axiom right which is that a * b is b * a right this is the commutive property right so some of these have names the three uh addition or multiplication not mattering how you combine them is associivity right the special numbers 0 and one is the existence of an identity for the operation being able to get home is the assertion that the operation has inverses right and then this last one is commutivity And that's you can see in the name here uh commutive rings are those for which the multiplication is commutive. You can do it more generally if you like. The only thing that's left is I want to tell you that these two operations have to be friends. They have to play well together in a in a way that you're used to. So um right so as it's done right now the addition and multiplication have nothing to do with one another. For it to be a ring I must have that multiplication distributes over addition. So the one rule that governs how they play around uh a * a sum b + c should be the same as well a * b plus a * c right and similarly I guess in both directions although that's sort of implicit after I already know that it's commutive I have to be able to do that in sort of both sides and this is the distribut distri this property is called uh distri distribut I can't say it This is the distributive property. >> Can you show me a couple of rings then? >> Right. So, let's do a couple of examples. You asked about the one ring to rule them all. If I had to give you one ring, I would give you the integers as the most fundamental ring. And this is just all of the counting numbers plus zero whether you include that or not. And then all of their additive inverses, all the negatives of those as well. And the point here is that in this set, I can take any one of these numbers, add them together, I still get another integer. again it satisfies all of these usual arithmetic rules for addition. I know that I can multiply any integers like this and I end up with another integer as well right um and moreover addition distributes or multiplication distributes over addition in some sense it's the most fundamental ring if I have any other ring I've guaranteed you that it has a zero and a one in my definition right so you can fight with me as to whether you want your rings to contain one um and so there's some some debate about that but for me all of my rings uh have a one in them and in that case in in many ways is Z here is generated by the zero and the one and there are no relations. So any ring admits a map from Z in some sense. So this is some set which I can make sense of all the integers inside of any other ring by adding one its inverses to each other in any ring. And so that's why it's this one ring that really maybe it doesn't control everything but it's a part of or or maps to every other ring. If I took the integers and I removed five, I just removed it and I said to you, is that still a ring? >> Right? So the answer is obviously is no, right? >> Why? >> You've done something where now the operations start to have problems themselves. So for one, uh I can't add two and three now inside of the collection you've just given me. So uh so there's no the addition operation isn't well defined. Of course, it violates other axioms as well, right? So for example, right, um once I don't have five, then well, if I look at minus5, right, it no longer has an additive inverse inside of this thing. >> There's nothing I can add. >> There's nothing there, right? And it multiplication also not well defined. Minus1 * -5 should give me five, right? So now it's not closed under multiplication as well. Right? So it's all the things start to have problems. Um, and in some sense, this ring Z is defined or is given to you as the smallest thing that has the zero and one with no other special properties other than everything I've already written it down here for. >> So, I'm now left with the impression that no ring exists other than the integers cuz I can't see how you could have a ring to obey those rules that hasn't got all the numbers. One of the the rules that I didn't give you, again, one of the differences between addition and multiplication, right, was well, multiplication didn't require that there's a way to get back home, a way to multiply by something and get back to one. Okay? Um now, um it's always the case that you can't always get back to one, right? In some sense, right? So 0 times anything in a ring is always zero. And so if zero and one are not the same, you could never take zero and bring it back to one. But um maybe we'll return to that in a second. So for anything else uh you could ask that you have the ability to go back one, go back to one, come back home. Right? So and that leads us to the next example here. Right? So these are called the integers. >> You told me this wasn't a rule though. So why do I care about this? It doesn't >> Well, it's not required for a ring, right? But as I said, communive rings or rings in general are one of the the basic constructions in abstract algebra. You can then start there and go in two directions. Right? So the first thing I could do is I could just focus on some of my rules that I wrote down. Right? So for instance, if I got rid of the distributivity and the multiplication rules and only kept addition, that would be the rules for what is known as a billion or commutive group. All right. All right. So I've removed the rules and now I've got a group which isn't one of the even more basic in some sense abstract algebra objects. Right? You could go the other direction and add rules. And so if I add an additional rule, I end up with the notion of a field, right? And so this next ring is our first example of a field. The rationals and maybe I'll write it out formally as a set, right? Is the set of all formal quotients of all integers has all the usual integers. And then I keep adding in all of the fractions that you could reasonably come up with between all of the integers you had before. And so um what I've artificially introduced in some sense, right, by adding in a half, a third, and all these other things is I've added in these numbers into my system that allow you to take any nonzero integer, multiply by something else, these new things I've added in, and get you back to one. in the integers themselves, the only things that you could multiply stuff by to get to one were one and minus one, right? And now I can do that with anything that's non zero, right? And um there's in fact a formal process given a ring, right? To artificially add in all of the quotients uh that require required to make it uh sort of the the best field you could approximating that ring. >> Okay. >> All right. So um and these are the rationals >> and this is called a field because I can do this get back to one trick now. >> That's right. So so if I add in here we have to be a little careful. All right. So I don't want to talk about the silly ring. Right. So the silliest ring I could write down is the ring which has only zero. Zero and one are the same thing. It has only one element and well it's only one thing there. So you combine the block however much you want and you always end up with the same block. All right? So this is the zero ring, right? So um if there was sort of the opposite of the one ring through them all, it's the the silliest ring you could possibly write down. So excluding that possibility, right? For any nonzero element of the ring, there must be a multiplicative inverse so that when I multiply a times its inverse, I get back to one again, right? Which again is a inverse a as well. The order doesn't matter in my my rings. >> That's a ring, but it's also a field. >> That's a field. So fields are a subclass of rings. >> Can you get rings or fields for that matter that don't have an infinite number of members? >> Yes, you can. I said that the silliest ring you could write down was the zero ring, which had only one thing, right? But let's say I want to be a little less silly, but not by much, and write down a ring which has only two things. Okay. So, um here's another example, right? So, I'm going to give you a ring R which I'm going to just for now call even odd. This ring has two elements and I have to give you two operations on this. Again, every ring has the zero and a one in it. And I'm going to just going to tell you in advance that zero is going to be even what I mean by zero and one is is going to be odd. I have to give you these two operations and maybe it's best to do in a table, right? And they satisfy exactly the rules that you would get for multiplying integers here. Even plus even is even. Even plus odd is odd. Odd plus even is odd. And odd plus odd is even. Right? So I've now given you what this operation does. So I have my two blocks even block odd block. And here is the rule to combine them. Right? And you can check this satisfies all the rules right as written down here. in particular um as I said zero the even is the zero inside of this ring and all that means is it's a it's a one of the elements so that even added to anything gives you back exactly what I started so you can see that the first row of this table is the same as just listing all the elements one by one back again all right you can also see some of the other properties right so this table is symmetric about the diagonal and that reflects the commutive property of a plus b is b plus a for example Right. The one thing it's lacking though it's not made of numbers. >> It's not made of numbers. So as I said at the very beginning, right? So here uh R is just a set or any collection. Right? But in some sense uh the this is one of the reasons it's called abstract algebra here. Right? So um uh take whatever collection you like. You could try to fill out the table however you want and how to combine all this stuff. >> Could be colors, >> could be colors, could be anything. Right? So these are just uh two operations that combine two objects in your set and give you another right. Um and I've specified a pretty flexible set of rules that it has to satisfy. >> I mean the objects have to be able to combine in that way. They have to be able to add and multiply by each other. >> That's right. there has to be some uh the rule is it's and it's really I write it as a table here because in some sense right it's always the case that um all right so you could imagine taking any set trying at random to create an operation that looks like addition by just filling out a table with what it would mean to combine the different things and then you could check one by one whether it satisfies these rules here's the table for addition for even odd and the the multiplication table is going to be very similar right so again even* even is Even even * odd is even. Odd * even is even. So now my table looks very boring but odd time odd is odd. So at least there's an interesting entry down here. Right? So again we see that there is a row and column that are just repeating what they had before. Right? So and that reflects that that odd plays the role of one in this ring. Right? Um >> and just for the absolute just to be absolutely clear, we're not talking about even numbers or odd numbers here. We're just talking about evenness. >> Abstract evenness, right? So, uh absolutely. But I came up with the rules and it's reflected uh in the names by thinking of what happens when I multiply even or odd or odd times even numbers. So, if I made up uh a ring of colors, I just chose, you know, red and blue. At first, someone's going to say, "Well, Brady, you can't do that because how do you multiply red by blue?" But if I came up with a rule for how red and blue multiply each other, and blue multiplies blue, that I just came up with any old rules I wanted. I've still created a ring as long as it obeys the rules. >> As long as it obeys the rules. But for instance, what you couldn't do is say I have red, blue, green, and black, right? But I sort of think and I'm thinking of paints, right? So if I multiply times black or if I make add black to my list of paints, it always everything looks black. that it just eats everything. So if the rule is, again, this is kind of silly, that any color times black is black, that's not going to work inside of this ring, it's not going to satisfy various axioms that we wrote down here. As you said, this even odd sort of arithmetic here, I'm not thinking of it as sets of numbers, but but it is a number system you've probably thought of before. Another example would be um of a ring which is is not an infinite set here is only a finite set of things is when I talk about doing arithmetic on the clock and maybe I'll write this in some slightly fancy notation arithmetic on the n clock again you're you're probably familiar with thinking about what it means to work on a 12-hour clock right where the numbers are all one up to 12 if I add hours and I get beyond 12 then I just cycle the clock around and all multiples of 12 are considered the same and any two numbers that differ by a multiple of 12 give me the same hour on the clock. >> So so 13 is one. >> So 13 is 1. 5 is the same as 17 is the same as minus 7 inside of this this thing here. I wrote n because I'm thinking of n being an arbitrary right some counting number some positive integer so that it makes sense to think about that clock right um and in fact all right these even odd arithmetic is the same as if you were working in z mod 2z on the clock that has only two hours even is again zero on the clock the odd is again one on the clock and you can do whatever you like and add and multiply here 1 plus 1 gives me two which is the same thing as zero on this 2-hour clock. But this gives you a whole bunch of other number systems here, right? And again, you could write down big tables, right? So I could take Z mod 57Z and write down its big addition and multiplication table and then just check one by one that it satisfied these rules where I only am allowed to write down numbers that actually show up on my 57hour clock. So we started off with the integers and the rationals, right? We went to some of the finite ones and then um and those uh are sort of these very small rings. You can also go the other way and start to talk about rings that at least in my mind are way bigger, much larger. Right? So um let's write a couple of those down. These are also fields, but there's some of the most common you've run into before. So I could talk about the real numbers. These are all right. If I had to define it formally, I would tell you it was all possibly infinite uh decimal expansions. More formally, again, there is a mathematical process to start off with the rational numbers and produce the real numbers like pi or square of two or or e or any of these things, right? By sort of formally um uh plugging in all of the holes that you can't even really see inside of the rationals. again give it any huge decimal um I can add two of them and it gives me another one or I can multiply them and it gives me another one right and so these also form a ring in the in the same way same thing I can talk about the complex numbers which uh I would build up from the reals by just taking the reals and then you formally add uh so this sort of imaginary number the square root of minus1 or i the story here is we started off with z I then added these multiplicative inverses that gave me q. I filled in all the holes. I got to r and now I've added another solution, right, to uh some algebraic equation, right? So I added a square root of minus1, right? And now I have the complex numbers here. And so in some sense all of those rings are very naturally derived starting from the integers, right? And then I've produced uh all of your favorite friends in mathematics basically, right? So but one of the reasons to get to the complex numbers is I want to tell you about a variant on the integers that you can see inside the complex numbers. So um inside the complex numbers I have what are known as the Gaussian integers >> is that sorry is that inside the complex numbers >> that's what the bracket i is but this bracket is just some notation here for what I mean by these things right so here right every complex number I can write as a real number plus some real multiple of this new fake number the the square root of minus1 if the multiples I take are only allowed to be integers that gives me the gaussian integers for example I have 2 + 3 i minus i. All of these are Gaussian integers, but something like 12 + p i is not allowed, right? So, well, because the the real component 1/2 wasn't an integer and in this case also the um the imaginary component pi i was not a integer multiple of i. Right? If you think about addition and multiplication of complex numbers, you end up playing around with just the coefficients of uh one and i and the two components and combining them like usual, right? So this set here is closed under addition, right? And as well it's closed under multiplication just for some silly example here. Right? Maybe we'll multiply these two numbers. All right? So and again, right? So uh the rule here is you only do what you need to use the rules to do right. So again I should really uh write this out and think of this in terms of addition and multiplication and multiplication distributing over addition. So if I think of that in this way right I've got 2 * 4 - 2 I + 3 I * 4 - 2 I all right and I can distribute again. So now that's going to give me 8 - 4 I + 12 I - 6 I squared. The I^2 is really -1. So that's really a plus 6. And now I can combine everything together again to get to get 14 + 8 I. I've come back to and written it as an integer plus an integer time I. So it's still an allowed Gaussian integer. And uh addition would work even easier. You just add the components one by one. All right. >> Yeah, >> the integers have very nice properties that are not just listed on the the axioms here. The integers have unique factoriization or unique factoriization domain, right? So in particular um you have special ones namely the primes, right? And every integer up to sign is uh just given as a product of primes in a unique way, right? So they the prime numbers are somehow the building block. Turns out the Gaussian integers have the same properties. So, so there are prime and not prime Gaussian integers, right? And the prime ones uniquely build up all of the other Gaussian integers. And part of the interest here is um uh when uh these Gaussian integers when their primes are different from the primes in the integers right so there's a very famous theorem of uh well it's called I think attributed to forma right telling me when a a prime integer p right remains a prime inside the gaussian integers right and so it's prime in the gaussian integers if and only if uh it is not one mod four. All right. So, and we can sort of see that just to do a do the example and tell you what the theorem is here, right? So, three is prime in z joint i or in the gaussian integers. But for instance, five is not. And one way to see this is well any integer or any prime odd prime that is a uh is one mod 4 uh by from theorem is a sum of two squares. All right. So here five I can write for instance as 1 + 4 right and then uh using the rules for addition and multiplication in the Gaussian integers I can write this for instance as well say 2 + i * 2 minus i. So it's not prime because I can break it up into smaller pieces and in some sense the the primes inside the gussian are supposed to be the smallest pieces I could break this up into. Right? I know this isn't what the video is about, but I don't think I've heard of this before. These numbers that are prime in both, are they got a special name? Like are they mega prime? >> Yep. So these are these are Gaussian primes, right? So or whatever you like. All right. And for the uh is that every odd prime uh that is one mod 4 can be written as a sum of two squares or in fact that does all of them. The ones that are 3 mod 4 cannot be as well. So the numbers so these numbers that don't make it don't make the cut like five they're like inferior primes are they or >> they're like inferior primes. So they split up here in the Gaussian integers in much the same way that when I talk about primes often I'm a little sloppy in the integers about what whether um what to do with the sign of the prime. I've been sort of sweeping the negativity under the rug. Right? Um here in the Gaussian integers you have to be a little flexible about what you're allowed to multiply by. Um when I say prime I mean prime uh also up to multiplying by one and minus one just like in the integers but also i and minus i because those are the four numbers inside of the integers that you can always multiply by and actually get home in the Gaussian integers. That's another one of my favorite rings that you've you've discovered and this is a well-known sort of theorem in number theory or I'm characterizing which of these are prime. But maybe to get back to what I promised at the beginning of the video, right? To me the most important rings that I run across and play around with on a regular basis uh with are polomial rings. All right. So when you asked at the beginning for the one ring to rule them all one of uh my rules in life is if I can show anything new about a polinomial ring over a field then then I have achieved something that is really good because they're universally applicable. One of my shticks would be to say that even calculus the whole field is designed about taking an arbitrary function and trying to show that you can pretend it's a polomial. Right? So that's how important they are. >> Okay, go on then. What's a polinomial? >> Right? So you've probably spent a fair bit of time in in school playing around with polomials. Here's a quadratic polomial. All right. So and what I mean by this is I have some variable, right? and I have all of its powers and then I have coefficients I throw on um and that gives me some function. But uh in grade school you've probably played around with these as actual functions. So I could draw a graph of this thing as some parabola if you like. And here I don't really want to think about them that way. I want to think about these as sort of formal objects. Right? So here if I write for instance take one of the rings we had above like the real numbers and write r join x I mean the set of all polinomial functions expressions that are sums of coefficients time powers of a fixed variable x where all the coefficients are inside the real numbers. For instance, here of 2 * x 4 - * x + 3, right? Is certainly an allowed polomial inside of this ring because all the coefficients here, the roo2, the pi, and the three are all real numbers, right? But if I were to take something like 3 I * x cubed - 4, right? This would now be not allowed, right? because 3 I right is really a complex number and not right so this is no dice when you think about how you would normally multiply and add polomials right all you really need to know how to do is to follow the basic rules we started off at the beginning right so I can expand everything uh using the distributive property right and then I just multiply everything term by term uh the x's and everything move past one another because of the commutativity property for multiplication And now all I really need to know how to do is to multiply the coefficients. So um you could do this here. I did it with the real numbers, right? But you might as well do it with any um any ring is your set of coefficients. In fact, any communive ring, >> you call them functions and uh things like these these equations that I remember from high school. Just every single one I could dream up sits in somewhere in the ring, >> right? And so here I did it um all right with the the ones like the real numbers um in particular. Remember the real numbers were a field again uh it's a sort of another very important fact that if I look at polomial rings where the coefficients are a field like the real numbers or complex numbers or the rationals um then um all of those again have this unique factorization property right so um inside of rjint x I can make sense of what it means to take a prime polomial right which is going to one of the building blocks of all of the other polomials in sort of very precise way. So at the moment I can imagine these rings and fields are massive right they've got they've got so many members in them for them to be able to obey the rules like you used clock arithmetic to shrink things down can you do all these things in clock arithmetic and shrink them down or >> well that's right in some sense uh one of the um important things about polinomial rings is that I can then later impose relations right so for instance inside of r join x one of the prime building blocks is the polinomial x² square + 1. All right. So there's no way to factor it as a product of uh sort of other things and sort of break it up in any way. Right? But I could also think about x^2 + 1 as as a new relation inside of this ring given any polomial. I can consider what would happen if I just impose the relation in this case uh x^2 + 1 equals 0. I'm thinking of this as saying I'm imposing the relation that x^2 + 1 is zero. Right? So I want to form a ring which is just like the polomials but in addition I have x^2 is equal to minus1 right i.e. I've given you a number whose which is serving the role of the square root of minus1. So in fact this ring is the formal way to take the real numbers again and construct the complex numbers if you will right so x here is serving the role of i. Um so those two rings are really the same thing and that's sort of the analog of starting off with the integers and using some equivalents um to get these smaller uh clock arithmetic rings. Here I've started off with a polinomial ring and I've used a relation. It's not quite 12als 0 or something like that. that it's instead x^2 + 1 equals 0. But that one relation allowed me to compute or to create other interesting rings out of this. Rings are a big deal to you and your your discipline of mathematics. >> To me so far, they just seem like a way of sorting things out, bins and drawers and shelves to put things on that you want to actually do real mathematics with. Why are the rings themselves so important? >> Well, um, and you can sort of see this. So I write down RNX. And the reason why you you've played around a lot with around a lot with polinomials with real coefficients is because in some sense math is a language which is used to try and model and describe the world right polomials are very very sort of simple ways of creating functions that model things right they only involve finite finite data right so there's only finitely many coefficients that are allowed to be non zero to write this whole thing down I can program in um what those coefficients are to computer and sort of model everything in the sense that functions describe the world and that's why I think functions are important um polomial functions are the simplest and most versatile way all right so to simply describe functions right so and that's why sort of they are really sort of fundamentally important objects and if you can show something new about a polinomial ring you've shown something new about uh a concept that has super wide applicability Z All right, I get um the zero set gives me um x^2 + y^2 equ= whatever that number z ^2 is. So I get a circle. If I think about this over here, this produces sort of the quadric cone where at each fixed zle I have a nice circle. It goes down to one where the diameter is zero.
