# Mathematician Attempts Art - Numberphile

Источник: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UfP83M07s24
Канал: Numberphile

Hey there, everyone. We have a Number >> This is not going to be good. I don't know. I've never I've never seen I've never seen your artwork. You know, your math papers are always quite tidy and nice. you're right. I like I I I spend great effort in with a fountain pen writing beautiful equations. That's That's absolutely true. I don't think it translates to portraits. I'm going to be honest with you. Let's find out. Chloe, are you up for this? I so am. Yeah. Have you ever seen Hannah draw or paint or anything or No, no, No, Could could a Picasso, though. You never. Great point. I should go for the castle style. Whatever style you like. Come on then, let's do this. Chloe, if you Thank you. Hannah, you've got the number file Sharpies. >> the number file Sharpies. Right, I'm going to do it like they do in school. I mean, it's basically curvature of three-dimensional surfaces, isn't it really? That's the Yeah, it is. It is. Yeah. And then just just lie on it. I'll do a bit of that. And then you do it in the middle, don't you? Cuz the eyes are like surprisingly far down, aren't they? This is like the background bit. Are you asking Chloe for help here? Are you Are you cheating? Am I Have I done it bad so far? No. I'm not sure how to do the hair on this. >> give me a lot of hair. Okay, well, I'll do the hair in black. That's going to be all right. That's going Chloe, were you a good artist when you were young? Like, if I had gone back in a time machine and met you as a girl, would you have already been the girl who was good at drawing and painting and things? I was drawing. I was I definitely I was definitely doing it. Whether I was good is probably subjective, but I was there. Okay. I just kept doing it. Yeah, I just loved it and my own little world of just like making things. That was fun. And what are your attitudes to mathematics and math? And did you Did you And have you learned any more as a result of working with Hannah? Yeah, we didn't really talk math. Did we talk math? Oh, I barely have a conversation without it, to be honest. I just try and sneak it in when you're not looking. Actually, I did maths at A levels at school. I actually really enjoyed maths. I like the the problem solving and yeah, that's probably my second favorite subject. >> Nice. Yeah. So, you're doing the hair before any other facial feature? >> I am. It's the bit that I'm starting with the easy stuff. I can't brush my hair in front of my eyes to get rid of the an emo. Yeah, that's just just just like Let me ask, did you two message this morning about jumpers or We didn't. This is actually completely accidental. Yeah. But we apparently have synchronized, which I'm I'm frankly quite proud about. I actually have a black and white check shirt like that that I was going to wear as well. I was so close, but I went for this one instead. That would have been amazing. It would have been crazy. Okay, if you could stay still, please. Okay. I mean, I was sort of joking about the curvature of different surfaces, but it sort of is, isn't it? Cuz one thing that I've noticed with your portraits Oh god, I'm so scared. >> This is I mean, this is do or die now. The hair you can rescue, but once you commit to the eyes with a Sharpie Okay, so so one thing that I've noticed that you do is that you sort of focus on the shadow. So, you're not like outlining things. It's more like you follow this kind of block of a shadow. If I go down there with your nose on the shadows, is that a terrible idea? No. No. So, you sort of go like this. It's like this This is the worst thing I've ever been asked to do in my entire life. Thank you. Okay, so there's Do you see like down the nose, there's like a straight line of shadow? Where it's like the curvature of the >> I see that. Right? Okay. So, this I think that's what she does. That's what when I've seen you working, that's kind of what you do. It's like you you sort of start in with the shadow, and then you've got like a dark bit there. It kind of goes like that. Right? And then on the eye, this bit's quite bright. Hang on. My advice is kind of commit to the messiness, cuz I always think people know what they're doing when they do it like this. You're actually right. Right, where's your mouth? There's like quite a hard line there. And then Hang on. Chloe, have you had many portraits done of you? You probably have, I guess, in art classes and things like that. I think I have one that I sat for not that long ago. Just a little exercise, but it's um Okay. It was yeah, it was okay. It's quite therapeutic. What, sitting? Yeah, for a while, and then I get really envious that I'm not making something. >> Oh, do you? God, you're welcome to jump in anytime. Chloe, when you're walking around the streets of London and that, and there's just like a all these faces going past you. Are you always thinking how would I paint that one? How would I sketch that one? How would I Do you do that or do you kind of switch off when you're being a normal person? No, I do see like good faces to paint and I'm always like Are some better than others to paint? >> Yeah, some kind of like really good like good characterful like I don't know how to describe it properly. You have a good face to paint. She's just saying that. What is it that makes him He's a good face to paint? Good like good lines. Massive nose. Prominent nose. >> Prominent. Do you know what? That's looking pretty good. You're being ridiculous. It kind of has a thing to it. It doesn't look anything like her. I'm committing. I'm committing. I'm going to do more hair. Love it already. More hair. Also, I think that's a bit too high up. It needs a bit more like there. And then this is like Oh, she's got a nice little curve going on, isn't she? Oh, yeah, yeah, okay. Yeah, just swing down past the eye. I think that my coloring in requires work. Whatever. Uh, braiding. Next time you ask me for a favor. Well, would you have rather done a math video? Yeah. Yeah, I think the viewers probably would have preferred that, too. Factor 4,000. There we go. >> Right, can I make this mathematical in any way? Yeah, go on then. Come on. Give us something. How can you make it mathematical? Some kind of like give the tangent or something. There's some Gaussian curvature going on here that I can talk about, right? And then there's a bit of the stuff going on there, a bit of a shadow there. There you go. It's you. Don't overcook it. Don't overcook it. >> Don't overcook it. Hang on, your chin's much nicer than that. Also, I think I did your lips up too high, but that's fine. There you go. Done. Done? Lastly, sign it. Let's have a look. No, you have to sign it. Do Do like how Take responsibility for what you've made. Send help. Let's Let's have a look. It's complete. Special bonus, Keith Keith Moore, head librarian at the Royal Society. Come on over for a second, Keith. Yeah. Keith decides what hangs on the walls of the Royal Society. What do we What do we say? Would that Would that Would that get flagged? Would you put that one up? Well, I think the Turner Prize Committee can can stand down for just a moment. Uh would we hang it? No. Sorry, Hannah. I think it belongs in a bin. Okay, this is going straight to the Heron Museum. Yeah. I have a I have a storage unit full of brown papers, and this is going to join it. It's going to be like the Ark of the Covenant hiding away amongst the brown papers. >> Otherwise known as blackmail material. >> know what? I think it's really good. It's 20 times better than anything I could do. I actually like it. >> Thank you. You're next. You don't You don't want that. Trust me. Oh, here we go. There we go. Thank you very much, Hannah. >> No. No. No, thank you. Thank you, Chloe. Go and check out the Objectivity video all about this one here. This is the This is the one that you really want to find out about. But you saw this one get made as well. All right. Good? Thanks, Brady. All right. I I like I think you did I think you did a good job. Uh we'll let the internet comment to Do you humiliate all your friends on camera, Brady? Yes. I do, actually. That's pretty much pretty much what I do. That's my thing. Okay. Yeah, so it's kind of this kind of big secret. Okay. >> And a surprise at the very end. And what was it like working with Hannah on this? She was great. She was really really fun to work Really? Cuz I find her a bit difficult sometimes. In what way? I don't know. She's Look who's standing over here. Difficult to work with. You know it's true. No. You are a pleasure to work with. I'm sure I can imagine you guys had a massive laugh while you were doing this. >> We did. We had so much fun.
