# More Hyperbolic Sports - Numberphile

Источник: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zDJKFcZ0Kkg
Канал: Numberphile

Okay. So, let's examine vision in hyperbolic space. So, we're just be going to be in the in two-dimensional hyperbolic space here, right? So, now suppose that you're standing here and you're in this ball of radius R. And let's first think about uklidian space and you have a beach ball here. So, that has size one. How far away can you see objects? Why can I see those mountains out there which are 10 or 20 miles away and I can't see a baseball that's 10 10 miles away? It's because it's the percentage of your field of vision that it takes up. So if you look at um so your field of vision at radius r in uklitian space this field of vision here has length pi * r roughly 3 * r. So then this beach ball takes up at radius r takes up 1 over * r of your field of vision. So at at 30 feet that's roughly 1% of your field of vision. At 300 ft it's roughly 0.1%. At 3,000 ft is 01% and you can't possibly see it. So what happens in hyperbolic space? We make the same estimate. So here's your thing of radius r. There's your eye sitting there at the middle. Well, how big is your field of vision? Your field of vision is now half the length of the circle. So it's pi cinch r which is roughly pi over 2 e to the r. So even if it's 30 feet away it takes up like 0 0 they're not sure how many zeros but times 1% of your field of vision. So it turns out that you're that the beach ball doesn't take up as much as 1/ 1,000th of your field of vision until you're within less than 7 ft. So, you can't see that beach ball until it gets 6 or 7 feet from you. So, a beach ball 300 ft from you is going to be a speck of sand uh in a in a very large beach. Suppose Randy Johnson is on the mound. Randy Johnson is a retired baseball player who used to throw throw the baseball 100 miles hour. So, if you think about it, he's throwing that baseball 100 miles hour. You don't see it till it's six feet from you, which sounds rather dangerous. On the other hand, if you think of it, he's, you know, 70 or 80 ft away. So, he can't see you at all. So, and and to throw it accurately at you, he have to show throw it with about 0001% to get the ball to you. So, you're most likely to walk and you're never he's not going to see you. You're not going to see him. Um, you're going to throw the ball. You're going to walk bases and go around. And if you think about what this what this means for the outfielders, the outfielders, if you actually were somehow they got the ball across the plate and you despite not seeing it till it was 6 feet from you, managed to hit it, then the outfielders wouldn't see it till it was 6 or 7 ft from them. So their only strategy would be to stand in there with their mids open. Now people um sometimes in your audience may wonder this. Why are the units of hyperbolic space feet? Well, it turns out that this is American hyperbolic space. In Europe, European hyperbolic space, the units are meters. A lot of people ask about their favorite sport. So, sometimes we talk about uh what we call soccer and you call football or we'll talk about, you know, hockey. Hockey is big where I come from in Michigan. Tell me what you tell them about soccer because we do have a lot of a lot of European English viewers. What do you tell them when they ask? Well, it turns out soccer isn't going to work so well either because you imagine your soccer field, let's just say it's 100 ft by 300 ft. I don't know what the exact dimensions are, but it's probably something like that. So, in in uklitian space, that's going to be roughly 30,000 ft. And it turns out that what happens in hyperbolic space if you make these both and this 300 that these very quickly get very close to one another. So what happens in fact the area is about 2 pi or you know around 6.3. You can imagine that you could put player from one team here and a player from another team there and that's all you'd have room for. Right? And now you imagine you're trying to kick it towards the goal. What's over here? Suppose you're on this team. You're trying to kick it towards the goal. It's almost always going to go out of bounds because this line has become very thin. Your only chance is to sort of roll it down exactly down the line towards the goal. And as we've learned in hyperbolic space, it's extremely hard to keep things on a straight line. So that's what in soccer we would call that a very congested midfield. Yes. You know, and it turns out that hyperbolic space may be rather sedentary. You're only going to use like fixed exercise equipment. If you think about it, even if you decide to walk around the block, the odds of actually ever getting home again are quite low, unless you like leave a trail of breadcrumbs, but it's exactly 300 ft. How would you estimate that in uklitian space? You'd say, well, that's going to be roughly 1° worth of a circle of radius 300. The circle of radius 300 has length 2i * 300. And then you take one a one degree worth of that that's 1 360th that turns out to be if I remember right something like about 5.23. 2 3
