# New World's Biggest Prime Number (PRINTED FULLY ON PAPER) - Numberphile

Источник: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tlpYjrbujG0
Канал: Numberphile

Okay, there is a new world record largest prime number ever just announced yesterday and today I had a special delivery. This arrived in the post. In here we have the newly discovered mer prime in here is 2 to the power of 74,27,281. Make sure I get that right. And uh if you actually were one minus one trivial at that size uh if you were actually to print this number out it's 22 million. It's over 22 million digits. It's around 22,338,618 digits. And no one would be foolish enough to uh get that printed and shipped to them the moment the number was announced other than us. So let's get in there. [Applause] There it is. There it is. This is the new world record. Look at that. That is 2 to the^ 74,27,281 minus one. These are the digits. Volume two. Volume two of three. So there's there's volume three. And so there's another third. And finally here. I guess we should start at the beginning. This is there you are. Volume one. Look at that. This is the new prime number. This is We suspect we are Well, we're definitely the first people to have ever printed it out. I suspect we're still the only people to have ever printed it out because that is over two million digits printed in tiny tiny type. I went for a monospaced type face to make it easier to locate the digits within there. Oh, there's a mistake. Ah, there's not. Right. So I mean people get very excited when a new prime number is found but very rarely do you actually get to pick it up and hold it. So that's that is some serious that is some weighty that is some weighty mathemat look at that look at the size of that number and this obviously I'm environmentally friendly. I want to waste paper. So it's it's front and back. Now finding prime numbers is a common hobby for mathematicians and you know for millennia thousands and thousands of years mathematicians have been obsessed with finding prime numbers. numbers with no factors. And now it's getting harder and harder to break the world record of the biggest prime number ever found. And so the previous world record was three years ago. And if anyone has been watching number five videos for that long, you remember we uh covered it. Tony did a video on the previous world record. And that record stood for three years. And now we have another one. But they're getting so much harder to find. And so this one is almost 5 million digits longer than the previous one. And so it's gone from around 17 million up to around 22 million. You think that's not it's a decent jump. Well, don't forget every digit the number is 10 times the size. And so that's another 5 million orders of magnitude bigger. I mean that's just off the scale. So the record has now been taken by Professor Curtis Cooper. He's at the University of Central Missouri and uh he was running loads of computers there. He found this prime. He won the world record off the previous holder which was Professor Curtis Cooper of the University of Central Missouri. So he's one is his fourth. He's he's hogging them to be entire. I mean I I run the software too. I really want to find a world record. I'd be happy with anything in the top 100 biggest known primes. But no, he's hogging the top spot. And so he found two in a pair about a decade ago and then someone else got the world record back and then he regained the world record three years ago and now he's just cemented his position. He is he is captain prime. So the way this works if you want to try and find the biggest prime known to humankind is you just you don't have to do anything really. You download a bit of software and you run it on your computer. So, as we speak, there's a computer in my office running a bit of software to try and find prime numbers. And some central server will send your computer a candidate number. Your computer will then check it to see if it's prime or not. And more often than not, for the vast majority, not prime. So, you send it back and go, "Sorry, guys, not prime." Very occasionally, you'll be sent a number. Your computer will check it. You won't even know. You'll be out and about. And a number like this takes about a month. So, your computer will sit there for a month. on a number like this at the very end it's not going to be prime but very rarely if it comes in prime it gets sent back and officially you found it. It's your record. Uh the policy is a a number only counts as a world record prime once it's been seen by a human because obviously this number's always existed. This number predates our universe. So it's not like we've invented it. we've just spotted it. And so your computer finding it is not enough. When it gets flagged up that it exists and a human goes, "Hey, check it out." That's when it officially counts as a new prime number. And uh so yeah, so you can win well there's a prize, but that's beside the point. You can win, you know, accolades and recognition as the finder. I'm so envious. Sounds like a lottery winning it. And yet this one guy has won it four times. What's his secret? It does sound like a lottery, doesn't it? That they're just handing out numbers. Uh Curtis's secret is he has a lot of computers. So he's running it on 800 desktop computers. So he had a chat with the people at the University of Central Missouri and he said, "Look, all your computers, you've got them running in the labs around the night. Like they're on 24 hours because apparently it's easier to push updates and things to the computers and so they deliberately keep them on." He goes, "We don't want to waste all that computing power." And so they agreed to let him put the great internet mercen prime search or gimps for shortand terrible. Uh if you're going to look it up online, don't don't Google type out all of great internet merch. And uh he put it on all the computers. And so for the 800 computers at the university there, whenever they're not being used, they kick in and start doing this. So some computer sat there for a month. During the day, it was helping people learn. when people were coming in using it for assignments and university work and at night when everyone turned the lights out it would fire back up again it would reopen this nut and go right where am I up to right and then it would carry on and it would check if it was prime or not and for one of them it suddenly ding at the end of the result it was prime and it got sent off to the server absolutely incredible the 12th term in the Lucas lemur sequence but we only have to find it mod 8191 so to start with it's the same you'd have four you' Square that you get 14. You'll square that.
