# Playing Sports in Hyperbolic Space - Numberphile

Источник: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=u6Got0X41pY
Канал: Numberphile

So today we're going to talk about hyperbolic geometry. It's a different kind of geometry than what you're used to. We we all grew up with uklitian geometry and we're going to talk a little bit about the space. Then we're going to talk about what it is to live in the space. So we get a sort of visceral understanding of it. In particular, we're going to talk about what it's like to play baseball, golf, or other sports in hyperbolic space. There's lots of ways to sort of make a model for it. So one is it's based on it's just the inside of the unit disc. It's the set of points which are within distance one of the origin at uklitian distance one. But now I'm going to define a very different way of measuring distances between two points. And this is going to have the property for instance that if you want to travel along a the shortest path in hyperbolic space you travel along these semicircles which are perpendicular to the boundary. That's one property it has. And another property it has is this. You start at the origin and you walk straight out to the boundary. That's going to take you an infinite amount of time as long as you keep walking at the same speed. It's an infinite distance away. Yeah. So this this boundary isn't really there, which is why I tried to draw it sort of in a dotted way. So these lines are straight from the hyperbolic viewpoint. Which means that if I if I'm standing here at say position A and I want to get over here into position B. This is the fastest way to do so in hyperbolic space. That takes the least time. What happens if I were to go here and cut my way from here to here? That's not that would be longer. That would take longer. It's sort of like in here. If I were to start here at position A and I wanted to get to position B in uklitian space and I were to do that that I'd get there but it would take me take me somewhat longer. Let me show you a just a couple facts that are true at hyperbolic space and we'll use them and see how they play out when we're start trying to to do sports in hyperbolic space. So one of them if I draw sort of here I'm in hyperbolic space and I have a ball of radius r ball of radius r in hyperbolic space. What is its area? So this is um 2 pi kos r - 2 pi. Most people aren't familiar with that but that's roughly pi * e to the r. Now e is a number which is roughly 2.7 to the r. That means every time you increase increase your radius by one, you multiply your area by about 2.7. So we all know that if you start doubling and you double over and over, you grow faster and faster. This is how compound interest works. And if you look at the circumference or what's the length of the circle, some mathematicians would call this circumference, that turns out to be equal to 2 pi hyperbolic sign * r. And again, that's roughly pi e to the r. So the length of the boundary grows just as fast as the area does. Now let's let's compare that to uklitian space. So remember the area of uklidian ball of radius r was p r squar and the circumference in uklitian space or the length of the circle in uklitian space is 2 pi r. So this grows quadratically. this grows linear and here both area and circumference grow exponentially at the same rate. Okay, let's think about what happens in in baseball. So in baseball we'll idealize this a little bit. So we're going to have a field. It's got a made up of a quadrant and the infield has radius 100 and the outfield has radius 300. And so if you look at this guy, the area of this outfield is just over six is just over 60,000. If I remember right, it's about 63,000. Okay? And so in American baseball, we have three outfielders out here and they able to cover most of the outfield. And so we can imagine that an outfielder can cover about 20,000 square ft. Well, what would happen in hyperbolic baseball if you took the same picture? Well, now the area of the outfield would be it's 1/4 the area of the area of the ball of radius 300 minus 1/4 of the area of the ball of radius 100. And that's much bigger than 10 99. It's ginormous. So how many outfielders do we need? Well, if each of them can cover 20,000 ft, which is sort of a dubious assumption, you need more than 10 99 over 20,000 outfielders, which is bigger than 10 the 94. So, one thing you can see here is you're not going to make any Disney movies about um having a family big enough to have an entire baseball team. That's not going to work. Let me move to the next next sport. We'll talk about golf. So, imagine you just you're a golfer here. Stick stick to mathematics, professor. Yeah. Anyway, so suppose you know you're standing here and you your flag is over here 300 ft away. Have a nice little wedge in to the hole and you hit a very good shot. It's one degree off but it's exactly 300 ft. How would you estimate that in uklitian space? You'd say, well that's going to be roughly 1° worth of a circle of radius 300. The circle of radius 300 has length 2 pi * 300. And then you take 1 one degree worth of that. That's 1 360th. That turns out to be, if I remember right, something like about 5.23. So you're about 5.23 ft from the hole. That's pretty good. You should be able to pop that in. Well, well, you should, but I don't always do so. Now, what would happen if you did the same thing in hyperbolic space? Now you're 300 ft. Here's your pin. You're one degree off. You hit it exactly 300 feet. You're feeling pretty good. So we suppose we make that same estimate. Well, what's the size of a circumference of a circle of radius 300? Well, that was 2 pi cinch of 300, which remember is like pi e 300. And now we're going to divide by 360. Well, that's bigger than 1000. So this estimate suggests you're you're some number of feet which has over 100 digits away from the hole. Okay. So this can't be accurate because you know that you started 300 ft from the hole and you hit it 300 ft. So you're at most 600 ft from the hole. So we learned that this is not a very good thing to do and not providing a very good estimate. So in while in uklitian space walking around the circle isn't so very inefficient in a hyperbolic space that's going to be a very inefficient way to get around. So, how far are we from the pin there? So, you can do a little bit of hyperbolic trigonometry and it turns out you're more than 590 ft from the pin, which is almost as bad as turning around and hitting it backwards. So, hang on. I was What happened? Did it it curved away or what what what did the ball do? So, one way of thinking about this is what does this look like? You can you're suppose you start at the origin, you travel 300 hyperbolic feet towards the boundary and then you're one degree off and you travel 300 hyperbolic feet towards the boundary. It turns out that the the shortest way to get there goes all the way back in and comes back out. Okay. So, so, so my second shot, my next shot is going to have to follow a curve that's so sharp, it's another big whack, right? So you you know you're you're likely you you now you're 590 ft. Now you're likely to be 1180 ft away after your next shot even if it's very good etc. So you're probably never going to get there. To my uklidian eyes I thought oh wow I'm really close to the pin now. This is easy but in fact that path isn't open to me or it is open to me. Well it is but this turns out to be distance 10 to the 100. And if you want a path that is distance 590 it does something more like that. it goes back in towards the center and comes back out. The outfielders, if you actually were somehow they got the ball across the plate and you despite not seeing it till it was 6 feet from you, managed to hit it, then the outfielders wouldn't see it till it was 6 or 7 ft from them. So their only strategy would be to stand in there with their mits
