# Powers of 2 - Numberphile

Источник: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pKwsPBeSiOc
Канал: Numberphile

Well, uh you are watching this video so you like numbers. Uh and I liked numbers since I was uh very little and one particular sequence I really loved is uh was powers of two. So let's start with one right one is 2 to power zero. So it has to be here and then we have 2 4 8 16 32 and then we keep on going 128 256 512 1 / 24 2 over 48. Oops we are run out of space. Well, let let me make things easier and only concentrate on the first digit of these guys. We keep uh 1 2 4 8 and then we only keep one 3 6 one two and five one two and so on. So uh so let's collect all this data and uh put this all together and that's what we get. Here is the sequence of numbers I'm going to talk about. Let's look at it. The stretch 1 2 4 8 1 36125 which we had here. Let me mark it like this. And when we see the same stretch and then we see the same stretch. Very curious. And one more time. And we try to do it one more time. But then there is a little seven. And we have a box here. And here we have two things which are different. And if we keep on going, it happens to be absolutely the same as this one. But if we if we're here, something else happens. We have an extra six which wasn't there before. So the question is what uh what is going to happen in the long run? We have a huge huge huge number of these guys. And uh maybe maybe we can run a little experiment and count how many ones, how many twos, how many threes and so on. So let's have a little table. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9. So in the first uh stage we have three dots here because there are three ones, two dots because we have two twos and then we have a three and the four and the five and the six eight. So seven is missing, nine is missing. But then something else starts do going on. This this is going to change. The question I want to ask is suppose we have a billion digits. Then uh do we have more sevens than eights or maybe more eights than sevens? Uh what about six or fives? So how to actually make sense of it? So will will the sevens and nines make a comeback? Will someone break away and have a lead? Exactly. We have quite a few eights here and sevens or nines are trailing behind but maybe will this spring ahead. And another question is right we have a sequence which seem to be periodic. We have this pattern going on. What if in the long long long run we have another pattern and it'll start go on forever. Well, first of all, let me state the question. I mean, mathematicians when they state questions, they sometimes use some notation, right? You probably got used to it because you watched uh 100 videos of this channel already. So, so let me uh let me talk. We're talking about uh let me call it a subn. N is a natural number and a subn is the first digit of 2 to the n. Here we have a sub zero and then a sub 1 and a sub4 uh sorry a sub 2 a sub3 and so on. Okay. And then uh we look we take very big natural number n and look at the number of uh of little n say between zero and n such that uh this a subn is equal to k where this k could be one or two or three or four or nine. Okay. Okay. So what what is it if n is very big and specifically let me take this number and divide by n and this is going to be the probability you hit two if k is two or four if k is four. Okay so out of these numbers what is the proportion of the ones that have a value k. So you have this huge sister huge sequence that we saw already and uh we can count the number of ones and that's what I did over there or twos or threes and what is going to happen if we increase the length of the sequence. Mathematicians usually say where does it go to if n goes to infinity which means take a very uh and here k is fixed. So for example k could be one or two or three. So that's a question you can ask if you look at the sequence and some of you have seen a video about the Benford law and that's the answer amazingly. So you already know the answer. So what happens is that you have more ones than twos, more twos than threes, more threes than fours even here with our sevens and that's right eventually seven catches up and starts growing and it beats eight. And this uh the answer that we have those numbers which is logarithm base 10 of 1 + 1 / k which is exactly the ones appearing in Benford's law. This log 10 of 1 / k what does it mean? It means that uh the number of well the proportion of ones eventually goes to 30.1% well approximately and uh here we have 17.6% 6% and here we have 12.5 and fours get 9.7 and here we have approxim well it's it's not exact figure it's approximate and here we have 6.7 5.8 5.1 and then 4.6 six. So, it gets smaller and smaller. Obviously, you're not surprised by this because you're a mathematician, but well, I guess I would say I was surprised by this event initially when it turned out to be the case, but then uh there's a proof or some surprises. Like so many of our videos, this was recorded at the Mathematical Sciences Research Institute in Berkeley, California. To see more from this interview, including some more proof, there's a link on the screen and also in the video description. And you can also watch our previous video on Benford's law. The property goes up and up and up through the thousands uh and then down through the 2000s, 20
