# Return of the Calculator Unboxing - Numberphile

Источник: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rD6e925w4Ys
Канал: Numberphile

Welcome to the return of the calculator unboxing video. Now an independent production. To make it very clear, the uh myself and the selfsari and associated jerks are no longer no longer working together. I'm finally out from contract. And while I'm under the NDA, I can't say much. Um although I will say one thing. Look, if you're going to run And that's my last last statement on that. So, it's been a while. It's been a stressful time. Got a bit less hair now. But what we're [laughter] going to do is back back in form. We're going to unbox and review these excellent cutting edge calculators. Up first is the Bitun BT. I assume it's a collaboration with British Telecom 7839. That's a lot of previous calculators they've worked on. As you can see, there's a ruler. That's what the R stands for up the top there. And calculator. That's why it says it. That that is like calculator. It information technology. You understand this works. And there's a bunch of I assume very important things on the back. You can see warning. Absolutely. That keep that in mind. Glad [laughter] they didn't bother translating the very important warning on the back. Now, a lot has advanced in calculator technology since we last did an unboxing. Before, I would have to very carefully and some commenters would say dangerously cut towards myself to open these. But now, look at this little bit of little bit of tape at the top there. A single single cut just to just to sever that. And no areries. Look at that little cheeky cheeky careful cut. Single. Put that away for safety. single slice. This now comes out with no additional This now comes out with no This pops out the side with no additional fuss. Oh, wait. And this and the sticker at the bottom here. That's where we're going wrong. Oops. Okay. With only minor damage to the original packaging, that comes out. It's just that easy. Put that over there. want to keep you want to keep I mean a lot of people say I shouldn't be opening these because half the value drops the moment you open a calculator particularly one as niche as the Batoon BT 7839 but what's the point of a calculator if you can't hold it and use it and that has a massive off button imagine never using Imagine being an off button made of that size and you never actually use it okay so let's power it on great straight out of the box it's working don't have to put any batteries in although So there are later on we'll pop this open. See what's going on in there. So we'll take it out for a mathematical spin first. We'll do the divide by 0 test. 1 / 0 equals Oh, it actually says error. I don't if you can see that right at the top there. It's filled in the entirety of the word error. And it's now put a decimal point on the end of zero. Nice touch. Okay. Clear. Oh, there's always decimal point. That's always there. Okay, that's a feature. Let's do the one divided by 9 test. 1 divid 9 equals a bunch of ones. Correct. Now we multiply that by nine equals bunch. Okay. Okay. So it hasn't stored it very accurately in its memory. It stored it as all the ones and then stopped and so we only got those nines back. So some points off for that. Although for a four function calculator that's this simple, it has got a percent sign and it's got the square root sign. And we'll get to that one in a moment. So the square root sign is probably two first then square root. Oh, look at that. Uh, now we're going to multiply that by two square root and we see how close as a test of its internal precision we get back to two. Okay, not that close. Okay, we're off by a decent amount. Leaving all nines is an eight. So obviously the rounding has crept in slightly over the course of that multiplication. So clearly precision of calculation is not a strong suit. Let's hope precision of measurement is where it's at because as you may remember it promises to be exactly 15 cm and using our official calibration ruler we will be the judge of that. So we line it up. Here we go. Okay. I'm going to zero the ruler on the zero end up there. And then if I line it up you can see at the other end. Look at that. They're touching 15s as we say in the business. 15 to 15. Give me a couple of kissing 15s, you'd say. Now that means we don't need to use the plus or minus button because that is what you use to adjust the calibration on the measuring units over there. You can add or subtract slightly, which is a great feature. Now, finally, you may have noticed, as we said before, there is a screw on the battery compartment and interestingly, multiple screws on the face. So, let's pop them out and see what's going on behind the scenes. Taking the back off. Oops. Yep. Single well well installed battery. That's great. We'll put the bits over there. See if I can get that out. Single. Very well installed battery. [music] >> [music] [music] >> Son of a All right, here we go. Okay, now we turn our attention to the front plate. >> [music] [music] >> Oops, there it goes. Oh, okay. There we are. So, that's the whole calculation unit has popped out. And you might think, well, that's just an artifact of the construction and how this was originally assembled uh cheaply. But that you'd be incorrect. Quite the opposite. So, you can change the face plate. Uh partly because if you're in a different country and you don't want metric, you want, you know, freedom units, you can get a different plate for that. And here, this is only a very light serration, which would be a warning against someone trying to steal it if you like try and try and cut them. But you can obviously get a much more severe severe blade edge on that. So if someone tries to steal your calculator, you can really uh really send a message. There's all your uh there's your switches. So you got two interled, you know, meshes, not meshes, but like combs of wire. And then the back of these, when you push it down, there's a little conductive thing on the back of these and that will just complete the circuit for whichever one it presses down on. And in fact, this entire module, if you wanted to install a calculator, if there's anything in your life that hasn't already got a calculator in it, you know, you can just chuck chuck that into literally anything and you're away. So, there is the baton. I would give the display five out of 10. I like the fact you got your common decimal point on by default, but it's actually a bit difficult to read. Terms of functions, four out of 10. You got a couple. You got your plus and minus. That's kind of fun. Accuracy [music] wasn't good, was it? Three out of 10. [music] Couldn't do the route two test without an eight showing up. Ergonomics, I mean, it's got adjustable serration. I'm going to give that a seven out of 10. Cred. [music] Now, CRED's interesting because it's dismantable and you could swap out this plate for anything you want. So, you're the CRED is only limited by your own imagination. N out of 10. [music] And durability, I mean, it I don't even know if it's going to work if I put it back together. So, I'm going to give it a give it a five out of 10 for durability on that one. An overall score of 5.5. >> Fine. Has it got a name? >> That hasn't got a name. I I don't want to call it the Parker Square because it doesn't work properly. Everybody be like, "Oh, that's a classic Parker Square." Or someone would do something that's almost right but not quite and they go, "That's a real Parker Square kind of move." So, I'm not calling it the Parker Square. >> Matt, you know what this video is about. and caught out for crying out loud.
