# Schur Numbers (the world's biggest proof) - Numberphile

Источник: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=57V8Ud7PL8k
Канал: Numberphile

So today we're going to talk about sure numbers. Um but as a added bonus, these numbers lead to the biggest mathematical proof ever. Uh the record was set in 2017 and still hasn't been beaten. We're going to start with the numbers from one up to n. Our challenge is to color these numbers in a way that there is no A, B, and C of the same color with A + B equals C. So two of these can be the same color as long as not all three are the same color. So an example, well there are two things we kind of need to fix really. We need to fix n and we need to fix the number of colors. So let's say we have two colors and one to four. So how can we do one to four in two colors? So one doesn't matter what color it is. So I'm going to make one pink. Now two has to be a different color because these A, B, and C don't have to be distinct. And if two were pink, 1 + 1 equals 2. So we'd have failed at this condition. So two has to be a different color to one. So we'll put two in green. At this stage, three could be any color because 1 + 2 equals three. One and two are different colors anyway. They're not all going to be the same color. >> But you've said two colors, haven't you? >> Yes. So it can be any color of pink and green. We'll pause on three. What about four? Well, four can't be green because otherwise 2 + 2 = 4 would all be green. Four has to be pink. Oh, but now this tells us about three. Three is going to have to be green cuz otherwise 1 + 3 = 4 would all be pink. So, three is green. So, we have colored in the numbers from 1 to 4 in two colors in a way that we don't have any a plus b= c of the same color. >> It was possible. It was possible to do 1 to four with two colors. >> Exactly. Well done. >> Thank you. What if I asked you to put in number five? We can't do this because this is the only way of doing one to four. We could swap green and pink. Apart from reabeling, this is the only way we could do the numbers 1 to 4. >> Yeah. >> So, what color can five be? It can't be pink because 1 + 4= 5 would then all be pink. >> But it can't be green either because then 2 + 3 = 5 would all be green. >> So, we can't do five. If n equals five, we can't do two colors. And we actually write this as s for sure. This is the sure number. >> Yeah. >> S2 equals five. Five is the first n for which we can't color one up to n in two colors. Avoiding this a plus b equals c of the same color. >> So the failure point for two colors was five. >> Exactly. >> That's the sure number for two colors. >> Exactly. >> Okay. Um now for completeness sake the sure number for one color the failure point is actually going to be two because we can have one number in one color is fine. As soon as we add that second number we then have 1 plus 1 equals 2 in one color. So that's the failure point here. >> Yep. >> Um failure point for three we're not going to work it out cuz it will take quite a while. >> Um but for three it ends up being 14. I could do 13 numbers with three colors. >> And actually, that's a challenge if you want to try it. Um, you can do 13 numbers with three colors avoiding this condition. >> You know, I'm going to put that on the screen. >> Oh, yeah. Absolutely. I I would actually be intrigued. One thing I don't know is how many ways you can do it. >> So, see collectively how many we can we can find. >> Okay. Okay. >> So, it's getting So, it's they're getting up a bit already. >> They're getting up a bit. This is already double plus a bit. The fourth show number, four colors. 45 is the failing point. >> So I could have done 44. >> Could have done 44. Can't do 45. What about five colors? Going to find out later. >> Okay, [laughter] >> this is where we're going to get to. So there's already one thing that I have assumed that we can't quite be so loose about and it's whether these show numbers exist. What if say for 10 colors you can always do it? Is there always going to be that breaking point? and we want to prove first that they exist. Before we put time and effort into finding them, we need to be confident that this limit does exist somewhere. So, I'm going to show you a proof of why it definitely exists. >> This isn't the world's longest proof. This is the proof that we need to do in order to be confident that the world's longest proof will like eventually get somewhere. The world's longest proof, spoilers, is what this fifth um S5 is. And I'm not reproducing the world's longest proof to say that. I don't think YouTube has actually the capacity for that size of video. I want to show you why these SH numbers exist. I want to cast your mind back to an old video about friends and strangers. And in that video, some Pampina showed that with a group of six people, there must be a group of three, all of whom either are friends or are strangers. Now another way of looking at that if we have six dots representing the people and we draw in lines between all the people in two colors. One color representing friends, one color representing strangers, then we must always have a triangle of one color. Pink means strangers, green means friends. And it's impossible to draw in these lines without there being what we call a monochromatic triangle. So a triangle of one color. So in here we have this monochromatic triangle there. >> Oh, there's one here as well. I see. Yeah. >> Yep. There's a pink one there. >> But there always has to be one. >> There always has to be at least one. This says that if we have six dots um and two colors, then there must always be one monochromatic triangle. >> Yeah, that's proven. And >> that's proven. >> See elsewhere for >> see elsewhere. There'll be a link somewhere. We can actually extend this using similar arguments um to show that with again K colors there is always going to be a number of dots which give a monochromatic triangle. In this case when K is two for two colors the number of dots is six. Um if we had K is one for one color once we have three dots there's always going to be a monochromatic triangle. This can be proven. It will be a slight side step that will be just expanding what Simon showed. He showed a specific case. You can show the general case. So you just got to trust me that this number exists and we are going to use this fact. So back in the show world, >> okay, >> and we've got one to n and we've got k colors. And I'm going to say this n is going to be this value above. So this n is the number of dots we need to ensure a monochromatic triangle when we have k colors. >> That's something you're just proposing or >> I'm proposing this. >> Okay. And now I'm going to show you that if n is this size, then we always have this a plus b= c triple no matter what coloring we use. So this gives us an upper bound for our shirt number if I'm right. >> Yes. Right. >> Who knows at this point? >> Okay. >> Um >> we may have a gut feeling, but if I'm right, this shows an upper bound for the shirt numbers. Um and if they've got an upper bound, they must exist. We've got our n being this value, this uh number that guarantees a monochromatic triangle from up here. >> And now we're going to color in all the 1 to n in any way. So I'm going to show you that in any way we do this, there is going to be an a plus b= c for n this size. And I'm going to do this by taking a slight slight side step and drawing a graph. And we're going to draw a graph this time, not with six dots, but these dots are ellipsies because there's going to be many dots. There's actually going to be this R k to the 3 dots. And these are going to be numbered 1 2 3 4 5 6 and so on until this one, which is R K to the 3. Right? And we're going to draw in all the lines and we're going to draw the lines different colors based on their difference. So in this case suppose in our coloring one was green then anything that differs by one is going to be colored in green two we'll say was pink anything that differs by two is going to be colored in pink and so on. >> Yeah. >> And we're going to keep going. Maybe three is again green in which case two and five would be green and so on. >> Okay. >> So we're coloring these lines based on what the difference maps to in our original coloring. And this original coloring was just random. >> Any coloring randomly. >> This will work for any coloring. >> Okay. >> Right. So, what do we know about this magical RK3? >> Yeah. >> We know there's got to be a monochromatic triangle in here. >> Yeah. >> So, there's got to be somewhere in here some I, J, and K. And actually, let's just make K the biggest and I the smallest that are joined by a monochromatic triangle >> somewhere in there. Yeah. >> Yes. So, what does that mean? Well, that means that K minus J, which is the color we've used um for their difference, >> yeah, >> that is going to be the same color as then J minus I, which is going to be the same color as K minus I because it's in a monochromatic triangle. The lines are colored based on what we have in our original coloring. So in this original, these three have to be the same color. And now K minus J plus J minus I equals K minus I. So, here are three that are the same color and that add. These are our A, B, and C. Yeah. >> So, we found an A, B, and C in our list of numbers that add to each other and are the same color. >> That's bad. >> That's bad. But what this means is whatever the coloring, we have found our bad set. We have found the set. So, we know that our failure point is at most RK3. It could be less. We haven't proven we can do it up to there, but we have proven that at the very most it fails at this point. >> Oh, I said it's bad, but it's not bad. It's good because we wanted a failure. [gasps and laughter] >> We want failure. >> So, if you if you want to fail, this is good. >> Okay. >> So, we found that these sure numbers must exist. >> But that was presuming that that you said that this equals that. But do we know that that has to be the case? Um so what the sure number is looking for is a point of failure and what we've said is that if n is at this point it definitely fails. So we found a point of failure. Now the show numbers look for the lowest point of failure. Um so it might be underneath but it's definitely going to be somewhere here. I did assume this but that's just to find I've shown we have a point of failure which means there must be a least point of failure. >> Okay. Yeah I'm with you. Okay. So the So no matter So coming back to our sure numbers, no matter how many colors y >> there's always going to be an N. >> There's always going to be an M >> that breaks it. >> That breaks it. >> Y >> um which brings us along to the fifth shirt number. >> Yeah. Well, judging by this, it it shouldn't be cra a crazy jump. That jumped by three. That jumped by nine. What? That jumped by 31. >> Right. If you look at it, it looks like it's just roughly times three. Roughly. The show number five is actually the largest show number we've been able to find. Now, the reason for this is if you try and prove that the show number three is 14, you'll see it's a lot of work here. Luckily, there was only one combination we needed to think of. But the greater n is, the more different combinations of the coloring you've got to think of. For example, here if n is 14 and we've got three colors, there are three to the 14 different colorings that there could be. And okay, you can count some of them the same cuz one red, two blue is kind of equivalent to one blue, two red, but that's an exponential number that you need to check. >> So although these numbers are quite small, >> they were hard to get. >> Yeah. And the proof of what S5 equals is the biggest mathematical proof find because we've had to check everything. Um, some people won't count it as a mathematical proof because most of the data is checking. >> So it was brute force. >> Um, but for the sake of having an excellent >> headline, I do like the idea of this being the biggest mathematical proof. >> Was it all done with one of these supercomputers? Was it? M yeah it was done with something called a SAT solver which checks satisfiability is what the SAT is short for >> what's the number I'm dying to number >> so the number after two pabytes of data so you've got gigabyte terabyte then petabyte is the next one the first point of failure is 161 >> so even though it was one the biggest proof ever the number wasn't that big >> the number is not that big and this is the largest thing the largest show number we've found so far >> so they've been using brute force Right. They used brute force to get 161. You can do 160 numbers with five colors. You can't do 161. That's all well and good. >> They haven't got S6 yet. So, I'm presuming that's just cuz it's just too so much work. >> So much work. >> Couldn't they find another way to prove it that doesn't involve brute force? Couldn't there be another algorithm or method lurking out there for us? >> Right. Maybe. We haven't found one yet. Um, it is something to think of. I mean, the good thing is we do have this upper bound. So we've got at least a cap of where we need to check >> using the using this >> using this. >> Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. >> But also don't forget to find the first point of failure, you need to find a point of failure and then you need to show that everything below it doesn't fail. So it's not just checking one thing. You still kind of have to look at everything else anyway. So there's a kind of proof called constructive proofs where the proof doesn't just tell you a number exists. It tells you how to find that specific number. We've not got one for this yet. Um, if anyone has an idea, please do let me know. I'll be very interested to hear. Um, >> careful what you ask for. [laughter] >> But given this was uh found in 2017 by a man called Meen Haer and because it hasn't been beaten in what's now eight years, you've got to think it's going to have to be something complicated if it's taken eight years of people working to not achieve something better. >> Have they not put a super computer to work on S6? I mean, it seems like with computers getting better all the time, it would just you just have to wait a few weeks, wouldn't you, for it to spit out the number? >> Not as far as I'm aware. Um, also, I guess another thing is that for every math problem like this that us mathematicians find really interesting, there's another problem that might save someone billions of pounds that other people want to work on. And there are so many unsolved math problems that we really like. Um, >> no, I want S6. >> I want S6. Let's forget about these greatest prime. Let's all work on S6. [laughter] >> Let's forget about cures to cancer and >> Yeah. Yeah. Exactly. >> All right. Yeah, I get you. All right. Still be nice to get S6, wouldn't it? >> It would be nice to get S6. It would be very nice to get >> What's your guess? What's your guess? >> Well, my guess is that given generally we are multiplying by threeish. >> Yeah. Yeah. Okay. Yeah. Yeah. >> It would be around 500. Say a number so that when it finally gets published we can have it on video what you said. >> Okay. [laughter] Um I would guess let's say so this times three is going to be 483. I'm going to guess 485. >> Okay. There you go. You heard it here first. >> There we go. >> All right. [laughter] I've got you on the record now. >> I'm sure by now you know the name of our channel sponsor Jane Strait. They're a leading trading firm hiring top people around the world to work on stuff like machine learning, quantitative trading, software engineering. But did you know they've invented a game called Figgy to help people learn about the fast-paced world of markets and trading and negotiation? The card version here has been bit of a hit with Jane Streeters. They even play an annual tournament, but they've also made the game available to everyone. You can even play it online or via an app. Compete in all sorts of modes, including against your friends or fish bots. Learn more at figgy.com or search Figgy in the app store. There's even a nifty tutorial. Players don't need to trade in any order, so feel free to jump in at any time. I'll include links in the description and comments. as quickly as 288 and five super factorial is this times 120 which I believe 34,000 push it to the extreme. So in that sense it's like we want to try and make sure that we don't want three people to know each
