# Shakespeare, Numbers, and Chronograms - Numberphile

Источник: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ERAgUg-e_Qs
Канал: Numberphile

This is an amazingly precious and rare in this case set of books known as the first folio, which was the idea 70 years after Shakespeare had died to bring together all of his plays to make sure they were preserved for eternity. And from our point of view, what's really interesting is it gives us an insight into what the printers were doing. So this is post Shakespeare, but what are the printers doing with numbers? What number stuff is going on? And also numerology. Were the printers hiding numbers and other key facts in here waiting for us to discover them and unearth hidden secrets about Shakespeare's life. So we're in the Dulwich College archives. Here, it's two books. In fact, it's two books out of three. So occasionally, you don't get the whole first folio. You get it into different volumes, which defeats the entire whole point of it in the first place. So we've got the histories and the comedies, but not the tragedies. There's no Macbeth. There's no Romeo and Juliet. So bang goes most of those school plays. But um but still there's lots to be found in the other two thirds. And when it's more than half, I think it counts as a full folio. So there we are. It's a full folio, but not as some people know it. There are only a few hundred were ever printed. They think they don't know how many and and only a a portion of those are still around. And the immaculate perfect version of it, the which is all in one book and is not spoiled in any way, I think not long ago went for about $10 million. So they're worth a bit. These ones are less perfect than that, but still rather precious, which is why I'm trying not to touch it too much. What are some things about first folio you want to you want to share and and in a numbery context? Yeah, well, let's just look at for example, here we have Henry V and we can just see what the typesetters are writing. First of all, we've got to a stage where they're happily putting page numbers, fairly new thing to have page numbers, but also to have them in Arabic numerals as opposed to Roman numerals, which had been so popular beforehand. So how are they writing numbers? Well, life of Henry V, they couldn't be bothered to put an H. It's kind of curious. Why why that full stop? But if you look over on the actors' names, actually I think these are the characters rather than the actors, but anyway, crowned King Henry V full stop again. They don't like that H. But below it, Henry IV. So they're happy writing out numbers like that. And then later on, oh, but let's put a a numeral in there. Henry V, which is really unusual to find in the text any numeral like that. Interestingly, these days we'd use Roman numerals. We'd have Henry V. So it's like a reverse. Today, the quaint way of putting a monarch's number is to use Roman numerals. Then the quaint way of doing it was to do one of these then modern Indo-Arabic numerals. So that's trying to make be a bit posh, is it? Maybe a bit posh, I think. And the printers are showing off perhaps in an element. There's a There's quite often a case where the numbers are there for their benefit rather than for the readers' benefit and to show off to their their peers. So that's a nice example of them avoiding Roman numerals. Here we have in King Henry IV part one, known here as the first part of King Henry IV, the prince says, "Let's Let's see what be they. Read them." And this is papers with with money with with items, a shopping list kind of thing. A capon, which I think is a fattened chicken. 2S 2D. Two shillings and two p. Two pennies. But with Roman numerals, little Is there and Vs VIIIs. So five shillings and eight pence for that sack. So why haven't they used I mean, this is this is just a printed version. The people watching the play aren't going to hear Roman numerals being read out. Why aren't they just sticking twos in? Probably because you didn't use modern numerals uh in general text. Maybe they just didn't didn't have any because after all all of this would have been put together with letter by letter formed into a printed page. A meticulous job. And maybe there weren't any twos, threes, or whatever, you know, or they'd run out of them. So there'd be plenty of Is, Ss, and Ds. So let's just use the the ones we have lots of. Uh and anyway, we still remember those Roman numerals and we use them quite a bit. So the printers will be familiar with it. Those might be the only numbers that actually appear as numbers in the whole of Shakespeare's text. They're written as words all the time, you know, a hundred, a thousand, or whatever, but never as numbers. So this could be the only example. And it's in the first folio. What have we got here, Rob? Page numbering was a new thing and it wasn't that important a lot of the time, especially with this The idea of the folio was to bring all of these individual plays together. So the fact that one follows after another and has to have the same numbers after it, I mean, that's clearly a nice idea, but was not essential. So here we have Measure for Measure page 84 followed by Much Ado About Nothing 101. Quite often, you will find jumps from one number to the next. I think my favorite is in Hamlet, which is one of the tragedies, so we don't have that one here. It's page 157 is followed by page 258, something like that. It's a jump of a hundred numbers. And of course, once you've done that, you can't put it right really. So you're just, you know, whichever typesetter made that mistake probably got fired the next day. Yeah, that one seems like someone just mucked up, didn't it? And then they ran with it. Exactly. Exactly. That would that would that is definitely a mucking up. And there's lots of mucking up in this. But and once you've made a mistake, so expensive, takes so much time, you can't undo it. Cut and paste. It's just done. So a rather lovely sort of error-strewn but beautiful and really important document, which is bringing together stuff that had often never been printed before and certainly not in such a permanent form. So the other thing is this is this is after Shakespeare's died, but but um there's a growing feeling started in the 1800s that did Shakespeare really write these books? I mean, you know, he he he he just grew up in the country and didn't go to university and stuff. And bizarrely, it was a a woman called Bacon in the 1800s decided that her namesake Francis Bacon, who lived the same time as Shakespeare, maybe he wrote this. And he was into into codes and and and cryptography and stuff. So he's just the kind of guy who would talk to the printers and get them to embed codes to say, "Hey, I really wrote this." So I've got a couple of lovely examples in the first folio. I'm going to show you one and see how convinced you are by this. Okay, so we look at The Tempest, we've got a little line here, which for thou must now know, Father, you have often begun to tell me what I am, but stopped. Okay, we we don't have to worry about the text. Let's just look at the left-hand column. F capital F B A C And if we draw kind of an L around that, F bac and then on. F Bacon. Francis Bacon. You see, they've embedded Francis Bacon within this document. Are you convinced? Absolutely not. Are you? Well, I mean, it's a wonderful thing, of course. If you look hard enough, you can find anything. I suspect it will predict, you know, the winner of the the next World Cup in here somewhere. But nonetheless, this convinces If you're If you're looking for things, you can find them. But let me show you some more Bacon evidence. Here we go. This is from Henry IV. So like we're going across to different different works. And we have here a reference to a gammon of bacon capital B. Bacon's, that's not a capital kind of word, just an everyday thing. It's clearly been picked out. Bacon is significant. [Music] Let's forget the fact that lots of other words also have capital letters at the start. But chimney I can see there. Yeah, yeah, just forget that one because several times Shakespeare or at least his work has Bacon with a capital B. And it's on page 53. Of course, everyone watching this will know that's a prime number, but it's a number that there was a sort of faction at the time called the Rosicrucians. 53 apparently had some significance to them and Bacon was sort of in some way affiliated with this. I mean, you can find plenty of information online if you go hunting for it. Numerologists love this. So of course, Bacon is on page 53. And it's not the only time. There's another I think it might be in the tragedies. So we last we don't have it, but there's another page 53 with a capital B Bacon on it as well. It's all pointing one way, isn't it? Clearly, this guy who didn't write any other plays and didn't want to let people know he's a brilliant writer, maybe he Personally, I'm a little bit skeptical. Here's some genuine numerology. Have you ever heard of chronograms? Chronograms? No. It's It's a idea popular in the 15 1600s around Europe of writing uh words in Latin, but picking out in in larger print the Roman numerals to make a date as a sort of hidden date. And here's one of my favorites. This is from Elizabeth I and a sort of memorial portrait to her 1603. And in very tiny font there, it says more to our anno died in the year misericordia of of misery of of mercy or whatever. Picked out in larger letters M I I C D I. Well, you rearrange them into descending order. That's 1,000 1,500 16 03. So is this a coincidence that 1603 is the year she died? No, it's not a coincidence. That's deliberate. They've deliberately done a chronogram because they could. They found a word that works. And it's just one of those nice little things that that people liked to use. You'll find them dotted around. There's a couple. There's one in in Oxford, one of the colleges has it above the door. This is when the building was built. You pick out letters. Anyway, I thought I'd start looking to see if I could find any chronograms in Shakespeare. And sure enough, first folio. I mean, it's the it's the the source of all this this great secret numerology. And if you look at the heading page from Macbeth, we've got a D I M C. That is 1,500 600 1601. Okay, but at the top 131. Add those together. 1601 plus five, 1606. When was Macbeth written? They debate it, but here it's it's written in plain sight. It's clearly 1606. Clearly the printers are encoding this. You're looking very skeptical, Brady. The point is They haven't made the letters bigger or anything. They have made them bigger, exactly. But if you're looking, it only took me like half an hour looking around. I just need to find some interesting significant number in the first folio, and I found it there. So, you know, it is a classic thing. You spend long enough looking for these things. And there are people who do spend long enough looking for these things. You can find almost anything. Rob, you are one of the people who spends long enough looking for these things now. I have done it. It's proven. There we are. Yeah, you're in you're official now. [Music] Like look what I'm doing with that. Laurie, this is a beautifully designed Lovely. Look at that cover, the numbers. And actually, there is a bit of numerology in the cover. On his collar. It says 168. That is a significant number in Othello, but I'm not going to give away any other secrets other than that number is not there by coincidence. People who buy this book aren't going to get like a whole stack of numerology, are they? It's not. It's the final chapter. It's very much genuine maths and genuine mathematical ideas and numbers and stuff. It's really as much a history book as it is a math book, but maths and history kind of go together.
