# The Big Daddy of Infinite Integrals - Numberphile

Источник: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WiO2Ku7V1rw
Канал: Numberphile

Today we are talking about infinite integrals which is pretty exciting in itself. But we're not looking at any old infinite integral. We are looking at the big daddy of infinite integrals. The Gaussian integral. We're going to integrate from minus infinity to infinity. The function e to the minus x^2. The reason this is such a big deal of an integral it's often referred to as the Gaussian named after Gaus very famous mathematician. The first time you come across integration, you see this thing, you see you see what it's equal to. I won't give it away just yet, but you'll recognize it. You see the answer, and you just immediately want to know how on earth does that work? And today, I'm going to go through all the steps. We're going to figure it out and show that amazing result. So, minus infinity to infinity e to the minus x^2 with respect. Wow, you're I'm so excited. I'm torn the paper. Right. I've never seen that happen before. Wow. Literally contain my excitement. Okay, so we're going to figure out this integral. A good place to start with any integral is to think about what are we actually doing? Like what does this function look like? Why does it even make sense to consider this from minus infinity to infinity, right? Because for some functions that's going you're just you're going to get infinity and then it's all nonsense. So a good place to start with this one is think about its shape. And if you haven't recognized it or you don't really know what's going on yet, this might jog your memory. So this function, it's going to have the value one in the middle. So when x is zero, we get e to the 0, which is just one. And then it kind of decays as we go in both directions. So it creates this bell-shaped curve, this Gaussian curve. That's where the name comes from. There's also a clue there as to what the answer's going to be, but uh we will wait till we get there. So we have this bell-shaped curve and what this integral is asking us to do is work out the area under this curve. So anytime you're dealing with an infinite integral, it's a really good idea to draw a picture and actually make sure you're going to get something or it feels plausible you could get something that isn't just infinity because if you know if I have something that's just increasing like this and I'm going under this, I'm just going to get infinity. Not interesting. So we need to check it's going to give us that finite answer. So now that we've established it's going to converge, it's going to be finite. Well, it feels like it might be. Let's actually figure out what is it equal to. You told me it's finite, but presumably these ends, these these tails of the bell are never going to touch the line. They're never quite going to get there. Yeah. But it will give me a finite number. It will. We I haven't proven that, but by drawing the picture, it just it feels plausible like like you're going off vibes for sure. There is no I've not done anything here that proves this is going to be finite. But as I say, if I take the really extreme example, right? This is like e to the x and I do this from minus infinity to infinity. That's clearly infinite. This just keeps getting bigger and bigger and bigger. There's no way this area is not going to be as big as anything. But here we have a chance. It is it's decaying in those tails. Definitely doesn't touch, but it is getting small pretty quickly. So that's going to give us a chance here that it could be something finite. And that's what we're going to see. To do this, we cannot integrate directly. And this is why it's one of those that bothers anybody who does integration and sees this for the first time because normally you have a function here. You want to do something called the reverse chain rule and kind of reverse engineer what it could have come from. What might it's what could it be the derivative of? But here, again, if you've seen this before, you'll know that it doesn't work. And so, we have to actually employ a completely different technique. And this is why it's such a fun result because we're going to do something completely different. So, we're going to label the integral I I for integral. Very creative. And we're actually going to consider I squared. Now, this is one of those where once you see it work, you would like this is beautiful. But I don't know how you would come up with this in all honesty, but it's it's one of those, right? some some mathematicians in the past, very clever people have come up with this approach. So we're going to square it. Um so what does that mean? Well, it means we've got the integral and I'm going to say this is now x from minus infinity to infinity eus x^2 with respect to x and then we're going to multiply it by itself. But just to emphasize this is a different integral. I'm just going to re label my variable as y. It doesn't matter. It's the same thing. This is a dummy variable. So I'm just going to call this y. So now I have a result for i^2. But I can actually combine that into a double integral. So x is going from minus infinity to infinity. y goes from minus infinity to infinity. And now I've got an eus x^2* an eus y^2. When you multiply two numbers together to a power, you add the powers. It's the same number. So I get e the minus x^2 + y^2. And now I'm integrating dx and d y. So this is now i 2. And at this point, it might not look any easier, but we're going to do some more clever maths and actually get something that we can integrate. But as usual, I need more paper. So now we have an expression for I squared. We have this double integral, which if you've never seen them before, potentially is terrifying. But if you think about what integration actually is. So we I said here this is giving us the area under the curve. So now when we do a double integral, we're kind of doing the same thing. We're working out an area underneath like a 3D surface. What we want to think about now is over which region are we integrating. So at the beginning we went over the whole line. We went from minus infinity down here up to plus infinity. And this was for x. But now we've got x going from minus infinity to infinity and y going from minus infinity to infinity. So we have some kind of 3D surface and we're actually integrating it over the whole plane. all of x and all of y. It's not just infinite. It is a doubly doubly infinite integral. Minus infinity to infinity minus infinity to infinity two times over. So we now want to think about well rather than working in x and y and this is the clever part. Can we change the way that we describe the plane? So again carteesian plane we sort of have all of these lines which represent different values of constant x and similarly for the negative and then for these horizontal lines these are constant values of y and this works perfectly because if I have a point here I can specify the xycoordinate of that point. Rather than thinking of this in terms of x and y, we're going to set up a different coordinate system. And this coordinate system, we're going to measure the distance to the point from the center called the distance r. And then we're going to measure the angle, which we'll call theta, with the positive xaxis. And it's always with the positive xaxis. That's just a decision we've made, a convention. The reason this is going to be helpful is I can actually describe any point in the plane. I could use x and y, but I can also use r and theta. I can also describe what is the distance to that point and what's the angle and that's going to give me actually a unique way of specifying that point. So rather than going from minus infinity to infinity with x and minus infinity to infinity with y I can now say well how do I cover the whole plane? So I could be really close. So r could be really small. So r is going to start at zero. Could be really really small as I'm close. A really short walk. Exactly. a short walk, but then I could also be really really far away. And so it's going to go all the way to infinity, right? That's giving us this kind of infinite distance potentially. And then for the angle theta, well, once I know how far away I am, then I also need to know I'm actually going to get a circle. In fact, I also need to know what angle am I at. You know, maybe I'm over here. And so I've got a different value of theta. So if I specify the distance and I specify the angle, which is going to be the full 360 or 2 pi, we prefer to use radians. So I can go all the way from zero. How far do I go? Fix that angle. And once I know the angle, I then walk out the distance r. So it's uniquely giving you every point in the plane. Just like we can uniquely give any point through x and y. So now instead of going from minus infinity to infinity for both x and y, we can instead describe the whole region we're integrating over using this n to infinity on the distance and n to 2 pi on the angle. So all we have to do now is figure out well how do we change this integral involving x and y? We have to figure out well what do x and y look like in terms of r and theta. We sort of we change variable. We're changing coordinate system and hopefully we'll get something that might look a little bit nicer than what we have right now. So if we go back to our general point XY, I'm going to make this a triangle and I'm going to put a right angle there. And now I know the hypotenuse, the diagonal line is distance R. And I know that the height here is given by Y cuz that's my vertical coordinate. And I know this horizontal distance is given by X, my horizontal coordinate. So from this picture and using simple trigonometry I can just say well cos of theta is remember this adjacent over hypotenuse so that would be x / r. So x r is cos theta. And similarly I'm going to get s of theta is going to be the opposite over the hypotenuse. So y / r. So this now means sort of rearranging that x is r cos theta and y is r sin theta. So this now tells us the relationship between x and y. And what happens when we turn that into r and theta? So we want to substitute this into our integral. It's like our exchange rate. It's exactly that. Yeah. Previously we went the whole plane. So how do we describe the whole plane? We know it's r going from 0 to infinity and it's theta going from 0 to 2 pi. So suddenly we now we've lost the minus infinities and only one of them is infinite which is feels like we're making progress. And now our function here is e to the minus x^2. So that's r 2 cos^² theta and then it was plus y^2 so plus r 2 sin^ square theta and then we've got this dx dy. I'll come back to that in a moment because there's something going on there. But now we've got an r squ term we can pull out of the bracket and you've got cos^ 2 + sin^ 2 which is 1. Classic trig identity. So what we've really got here is r goes from 0 to infinity theta goes from 0 to 2 pi e the minus r^ 2* cos² + sin^ square which is always one and then we still have this dx dy term. So I haven't changed this because that is going to require a little bit more work because we have to think about what does this mean and how do we turn this dx dy into something involving r theta. Once we do that we then have our full transformation. and we've converted to a different currency to use Brady's exchange rate analogy and then hopefully we can actually do the integral and get the answer. Yeah. To figure out what does this mean dx dy we sort of go back to the initial definition of an integral and again thinking of it as the area under a curve. So dx here means let's take a very small distance along the x-axis and then what we're going to do is actually we're going to let that tend to zero because as we take smaller and smaller slices and then add them all up. That's how we get the area. It's as you make these smaller and smaller and smaller they look like very thin rectangles and then we just add them all up and that's what's going to give us the integral and give us the area and give us the answer. So what's happening in 2D now? It's very similar, but instead of just having a single slice, we've now sort of divided the plane up into these tiles. And if we focus in on one of these tiles, this is a small piece of area, which we can call da. It's a small bit of area, just like this was a small bit of the x-axis, a small slither of our function. This is a small square underneath our 3D surface that we're actually trying to integrate. So we can say this has width dx and height dy. Again emphasizing it's small but we've now moved to polar coordinates. That's what these r and theta distance and angle they're called polar coordinates. So a small piece of the plane is no longer a rectangle because we've actually created almost like a spiderweb shape for the cartesian plane. So rather than having all of these little squares and rectangles added together, what we've got is all of these different circles as we change the radius and then within each circle we've got different angles. So it really does look like to me at least a spiderwe or a dart board. And if we focus on one of these shapes, so if I take this segment here, it's got curvature. It's no longer a simple square. So it's not just dx * dy. But we can figure out what it is by drawing a much bigger picture. So coming away from the origin, we have something that looks like this. And then we're kind of out here. What we want to do is think about a small change in one coordinate and a small change in the other. So we say this one is the radius, the distance. Let's call that r. So then what I've gone here is a little bit further. So this is r plus a small amount. Just a little bit further out than where we started. This is definitely exaggerated. And then also we've increased theta a little bit. So to get to this line, we've kind of gone through some angle to get there. And then we want to do a little bit extra d theta just a little bit further around. So we've like fixed our r and we're like could go a little bit further around that clock that clock dart board a little bit further around and that's going to be a d theta little segment. So what we need to know now is what's the area of this because these things these will be our da which is equal to dx * dy. That's what we sub in our integral and how it's going to all come through. So we're working out the area of a sector. There is a formula for this, but it sort of makes sense to see where it's come from. We can think of it as saying, well, if I had the whole circle, then I would have pi * the radius squar. That's the area of the circle, but I've only got a fraction of it, and I've got some amount of it. So, I've got d theta out of 2 pi. I've just got part of the circle and then multiplied by the area. So the area up to the edge would be * the radius squ which is r + dr r 2. But what I've actually calculated here now is this whole bit. It's like the slice of pizza. But I don't want the whole thing. I want to get rid of this inner piece. You just want that thin thin crust. Exactly. Yes. Just want the pizza crust. So we're going to subtract off the inner bit which is the same factor d theta out of 2 pi but now it's p * r^ 2. So we subtract that off. So again, it's this bit is the red and then we subtract off this bit times this which is taking away this part. So we're just left with the bit that we want. Now what's this equal to? This is the magic. Well, when we are doing the integral, as I mentioned here with the area, we're letting these go thinner and thinner and thinner. So here we're letting d theta go smaller and smaller. It's tending to zero. Dr is tending to zero. So these terms are getting tiny. So, we actually only want the biggest term that we're going to be left with. And that's important to remember. So, if I simplify this, we're going to lose the pi. Um, inside this bracket, well, you get an r 2 plus a 2 r d r + a dr r 2 and then minus the r 2. So, we lose the r 2 term. And so, what I'm left with is actually just d theta / 2 and then we've got 2 r plus dr r 2. But now if we compare the size of these two pieces, these two terms, this is really really small and this is really really small. But R isn't. R is like an actual number. So this is like doubly small. So we just ignore it. We just say it's zero. We throw it away because we're taking that limit. So what we end up with then is that our area piece da for the spiderweb, the dartboard, the pizza, whatever we're calling it now. Twos cancel and it's r * the r * d theta. So this is now what we're going to stick back in that original integral and we're going to get that magical result. So now we can fully go back to i^ 2. So we'd already established we're going all possible distances, all possible angles. We have eus r 2. We simplified that. And now our little dx dy that small piece of area is represented by r * dr r * d theta. Now this if you're new to integration this might not feel any easier than where we started right and that's but this is a big butt and this is why I think it's so beautiful. This art term coming in this is the game changer. This is like the magic trick, the secret like card you have played to basically ace the whole thing. So the key thing is before we had e to the minus x^2 and there's a problem here because if you differentiate this function, you take its derivative, what you do is you bring down the the thing, you differentiate this thing at the top and get back the exponential. So if you want to go back and integrate up, you need this x outside of your exponential. and we didn't have it. But now thinking about things in terms of r, we've got it. That's why it's so key because it turns out that the integral of this, it's just the derivative of a function that we can figure out. So if I do the derivative of eus r 2, I bring that down to get - 2 r and it's that eus r 2. And this is what we've got. We've got the r here. All right, we got a minus2 factor floating around, but we don't care about that. So this thing actually has an exact integral that we can now write down. We can just do the integral without worrying about everything else that's happening. So what do we get? So I^2 is I'm going to do the integral with r. So we've still got theta there. Can't do anything about that. But the r integral is just going to be minus eus r^ 2. So I've just multiplied through by minus a half to get rid of that 2. We'll get our function. And then I have d theta and I have to substitute in my limits which are 0 to infinity. So this tells us now substitute in r equals infinity. So e to the minus infinity. We saw this in the graph at the beginning it's zero. If we go it never gets there but if we go all the way to infinity technically we are tending to infinity rather than subbing in infinity but it's going to give you zero eventually going all that way. So that term disappears and then it's minus the second limit and when you sub in zero you just get one. So minus minus a half gives you a half. So this is now just we haven't done theta yet but we've just got a half d theta. So now you just say okay so this is saying basically uh think of theta as as x if you want whatever variable you want. It's just what's the area under a curve that's constant a half from 0 to 2 pi. Well, that's just pi. We just do that integral straight away. Or if I want to fill in the steps, you say it's theta over two. You integrate up and then you go from 0 to 2 pi. So you just sub it in and you will just get pi. So as if by magic, we've shown that the square of the integral we wanted to do is equal to pi. So now you just say all right so then that means the thing I started with is the square root of pi and that is that is the the Gaussian integral that is the result of the big daddy of integrals. So now we know the area under this curve this kind of Gaussian curve this bell-shaped curve we now know this area here from minus infinity to infinity this area is equal to the square root of pi because what else would it be? It's always pie. Always pie. There you go. All right, I'm with you. Thanks for watching. For more videos from Tom Crawford and to learn more about what he's up to, check out the links in the description and the comments. Also, thanks to our Patreon supporters. These people go the extra mile to make our videos possible. Just some of them are listed here on the screen. And if you go to the number five website, you can see a full list of everyone. [Music] Thanks and uh see you in the next video.
