# The Unsolved Lollipop Problem - Numberphile

Источник: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=v8e-tYey7ts
Канал: Numberphile

What's a lollipop? Tell me about lollipops. Yeah, well, this is a mathematical lollipop. What it consists of it is a circle and a on a stick. And if you continued the stick, it would pass through the center of the circle. This part of the stick is invisible and the stick is infinite. So, it's a a circle with a perpendicular stick coming out of it, perpendicular to the edge of the circle. That's a lollipop. And we've got one of them and it looks like that and it divides up the region. If it's If we're doing them in the sand, it divides up the beach into the part that's inside the circle and the rest of the beach. And so, one lollipop divides the beach, the paper, into two regions, inside the circle and all the rest. Because this goes off to infinity. What if we have two lollipops? This is actually a little tricky. If you have two lollipops, how many regions can you make by overlapping them? Well, you could do this. You could put your other lollipop here and its stick could go here. And then, if we did that, how many regions would we get? One, two, three, four, five, six. We get We could easily get six regions. >> not get seven? Does that If these go forever, is the other side of the thing not a seventh? It's seven. >> It is seven, right. >> Yeah, yeah, you're right. Yeah, there you go. I know my stuff. You know your stuff. >> Seven. All right. So, each stick goes off to infinity. So, with with two, we can certainly get seven. And that's okay, but it's not great. You can actually get 10 pieces if you do it right. And what you do is you make sure that the circles of the lollipops overlap in just a little sliver. And then, you make sure the stick of the first lollipop cuts the circle of the second lollipop. Okay, yeah. Yeah, and then, scalpel, blue, we get this. It's going to go through the the center imaginary through the center of that. It's going to cut across this gulf where the two circles and then it's going to cut that one. So, I'll give it a little bit of space. Looks like that. And what you get let's count the pieces. How many pieces do we get when we do that? It's very careful. We all right. We have first of all, we have below the the sticks and above the sticks. They they two infinite regions. All right, one, two, then three and four. Yeah. And then five for the sliver, six and seven down here. >> Yeah. And then eight, nine, 10. So, we get 10 pieces. You can show using higher mathematics Euler's formula that the crucial thing if you want to get the most pieces what you need to focus on are the intersections, the crossings between one lollipop and the other lollipop. And the crossings it's it's crucial that you notice. You using Euler's formula you can show that the important thing is to get the most intersections between the lines of one lollipop and the lines of the other lollipop. And the intersections the there are three kinds of intersections. There are intersections where the circle part cross and you can see I've managed to make this circle and this circle cross in two points. There's also intersections where the stick of one lollipop crosses the circle of the other lollipop and we'd like each of them to happen twice. So, we can see that blue stick crosses the other lollipop twice. Correct. And vice versa, this the stick crosses this one here and here. And then the sticks themselves can cross. And they do here at just once. Sticks either cross or they don't. So, with two two circles, you get seven intersections. And there's a formula, the number of pieces equals intersections number of intersections plus n, the number of sticks plus one. With two, n equals two, we got seven intersections. I showed you 2 + 2 + 2 + 1, seven, and then two because we got two circles plus one, and that's 10. And that's the best we can do with two lollipops. And if we had three lollipops, ideally, we'd make each pair of lollipops intersect in this way. And it looks like this. All right. It is very tricky to draw. Okay, so the new lollipop is the green one. That's >> one at the bottom. Okay. >> Yeah. And it intersects the red one in the same way that the blue and the red intersected, and it intersects the blue one in the same way. Each pair of lollipops here meet in seven intersections. And the stick from the third new lollipop Yeah, it's going up. But it's slightly off-center, so that it doesn't it doesn't intersect with the intersection of the first two sticks. Correct. >> To maximize our sections. >> Yeah, you never want to have three things meeting at a point because you make a tiny little change and you pick up one piece, one region. So, that So, that stick is slightly off Slightly off-center, and it's true. You might think I'm fudging this, but actually, if you work to multiple precision and you draw it carefully, I did actually draw it carefully. And you can see it in the OEIS entry for this sequence. So, the So, how many pieces did we end up with for three lollipops? We need to know how many intersections there are. Each pair intersect in seven points. So, there are seven intersections there, seven there, and seven there. And none of them have been counted twice. >> No, they're all distinct. You can see check I'm very careful not to have any triple points or higher. So, we got 21 intersections. All right, n equals three. All right. Three lollipops. The number of intersections is equal to 7 + 7 + 7 each because each we got three lollipops and each pair meets in seven points. >> Yeah. And they're all different. So, that's 21 and then the formula is this. We add n, which is three, and we add one, we get 25. So, with three lollipops, we get 25 regions. But, where are we going to put the fourth lollipop? >> That's all I can think of. >> This is really, really hard. Yeah. Cuz you cuz if you put it up You put it up there, it's not going to meet >> No. No. >> Yeah. No, it is really hard. Where does the fourth lollipop go? >> Where does the And I tried and I did various drawings. And we know what we want. We want the maximum number of of intersections between all the pairs of lollipops. With with four lollipops, we've got six intersections. So, ideally, we'd get 6 * 7 42 intersections. Let's give people some thinking time. Yeah. >> All right. What's the answer? Well, it what didn't come very easily. On Christmas Eve, I posted a message to the Secret Santa mailing list explaining this problem and asking for help. It said it for I said with four lollipops, it's really tricky. And at 1 minute past midnight, I got an email from a couple of old friends who said that they could get 43 regions. The maximum would be 47. If you could get every pair to meet in seven points, you'd get 42 + 4 + 1, you'd get 47 regions. They got close, but but not not very close. And how And how did they uh place their circles to do that? Well, they took my drawing of three circles, and they added a fourth circle, which they got by perturbing one of the three a little bit. So, we still crossed most of the things the same way. >> They didn't perturb one of the existing circles. They They added >> They They put their new lollipop on top of the existing lollipop and perturbed that one. Yes. They took a copy of the red one and perturbed it a bit. Maybe they changed the the the diameter a little bit, I'm not sure. And they changed the angle of the stick. And that gave them 43. And that gave them 43 regions. Cool. It was pretty good. Yeah. And for the first 12 hours, that was the world record. And then 2 minutes past noon on Christmas Day, I got an email from someone on the Sequence Fans mailing list who I've never met, although since we've talked on Zoom. He was able to get 44 regions. But later, he got it up to 45. 45 regions. And what's more, he proved that was optimal. So, there was no point in anyone trying to get more. You could theoretically have gotten 46 or 47, but you can't. He proved that 45 is best possible. Yeah. What he did was really extraordinary. He took those three, and he magnified He modified them a little bit. He made one rather bigger than the other two, about twice as big. And then he blew blew it up, magnified it by a factor of 100. So, these circles got really, really huge. And when you looked at the edge of the circle, it was the circle was so huge, it the edge looked almost like a straight line. And I will show you what those straight lines looked like. And here's a picture of how it looks after he's blown it up. That green line is part of a gigantic circle. Yeah, and that's the stick of the green lollipop. >> That's the stick of the green line. And the red [clears throat] >> And the red is also that's >> The red is the It's this red circle magnified so that that arc looks like a straight line. And there it is. And that's the stick. And then blue, this is the blue circle. Yeah. And here's the blue stick. So he he magnified it. And then he very cleverly put a fourth circle on top of the place where the sticks come together. So that little black lollipop, that's the new lollipop and it's miniaturized right in the mess between the other three. Exactly. Yes, brilliant. So that So there it is. And if we go back and look at the previous picture, the extra fourth lollipop, the black lollipop is actually here. You just can't see it. It's so tiny. It's in blots of ink where the three circles and the three sticks come together. Neil, you were telling me before that was the fantasy. Yes. The best that's possible is 45. In fact, yes. >> Yes. Where did we lose? Where did we we lose the two? What's the problem here? The problem is really that it's putting down the fourth stick so it crosses all the other circles in the right way. Ah, because this black stick obviously looks like it goes out this way towards the It crosses It doesn't It crosses the red stick here. And it crosses the blue stick here. So the the black stick is okay, but it's also got to cross all the circles. And the circles have to cross all the circles. Oh, cuz it doesn't cross the green circle, does it? Ever. Obviously. >> No, obviously. The black stick will never cross the green circle. It will cross the green stick. >> Yeah. Eventually, a few miles away. Not the green circle. >> But not the green circle. Okay. So, we've lost two two goals. We're down by two goals and that's the best you can do. Where's the fifth lollipop going to go? We have estimates for that. And again, it's by taking one of the four and making a copy of it and perturbing it a bit. Okay. Shaking it a bit and putting it down. And in fact, Jonas worked out how to do that with taking copies of all four of these and putting them down and jiggling them a little bit. We have bounds with with five circles. All we know, I mean, we know a lot. It's either 71 or 72 regions. But we don't know which of those two. >> We don't know which of those two. Are people working on this? Uh I don't know. They might after they've seen this video. I hope they will. We We think the answer's probably 71. But that's just a guess. I want to show you this gear train and new grown-up toy made by the people at Metmo. After buying one of these off my own bat, I decided to go and visit the makers in Leeds. I was just super curious and I thought it was something you guys would love as well. So, really, this whole sponsorship is because of me, not them. They come in two styles, brass and stainless steel, each gear doubling the torque. So, you need to turn this top gear 16,384 times to make the bottom one turn >> [music] >> just once. I love this so much I took it to tennis to show my friend. He's an actuary so he's into numbers too. Then I took it along to show my trainer at the gym. I think he likes all the gears and ratios and that kind of stuff. Check it out yourself on the Metmo website down below where you'll also find an offer code to get yourself a bit of a discount for uh for the number file viewers.
