# The 15-Game - Numberphile

Источник: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UafhPUOCM1E
Канал: Numberphile

Can we play a game, Brady? >> I'm in. Let's do it. >> The game is simple. I'm going to call it the 15 game. I say it's simple. I still feel like I can't play well, although I'll discuss some strategy in a moment. Let's just play the game because that's how you should start any game. Play it. We have the digits 1 to 9. That's the playing pieces we're going to play with, Brady, and each time we take a turn, you take one of the digits. The goal is to make 15. I'm going to call this the 15 game. There's one other rule, though. You need to make 15 by adding the numbers that you take, and you need to add three of them to make 15. There's no 15 block, obviously. You can't just take 15. If you took a 7 and an 8, that would make 15, but that doesn't win cuz you need three of them. You might have four blocks in your stack, but you need to use three of them, exactly three, to make 15. So, it feels simple. Take turns to take blocks. If you get a set of three in your pile that makes 15, you win. We might draw. No one might make 15. We You might win straight away. You're I can see US can't see Brady scheming. He's trying to figure out the tactics. I can see it. >> No, I've already figured out what's going to happen here, but all right. Let's Do you want to go first or second? Let's just play the game a couple of times. I'll go first. Which one would you like? I'm taking nine. You have nine. I will take five. Your turn. >> [laughter] >> Four. Right, so I'm thinking out loud along with all the viewers. 9 + 4 is 13. So, I think I better take two, otherwise I'm in trouble. I've taken a two. Oh, now. I don't want you to take eight. I've got to play some defense now. Fine. Then, I suddenly feel out of my depth cuz I'm like, when there was two numbers, I can add them up and play defense, but there's three and the combinations are genuinely, I start to panic. Like, it's basic arithmetic. I'm going to take a six. I don't think that makes me win. But, I haven't thought too hard about it. What do you want? All right. So, 12 if I Oh, Oh, if I take three, if I take three, I'm going to win. Yeah, I think you are. Yes. Yes. >> Well, I'm ready. You've got three blocks that make 15, and that means you win. I feel a bit foolish that I should have seen that coming, and I definitely should have seen that coming. But, What, you didn't lose on purpose? >> Well, not deliberately. I genuinely feel a sense of panic with basic arithmetic. A lot of my partitions do, I think. This is not really my forte. I should have seen that coming. Can we play again? I'm going to take a five. Okay. So, I feel like there's some algorithm and there's something I should be taking right now. >> I feel that pain every time we play a new game. >> Mhm. Seven. I'm going to take a two. All right. So, if you take eight next, you'll win. So, I need to take eight. Seven and eight. See, and I'm feeling good because like you can't use those. I can't think about this in the way I want to. So, you know that you've got 11, but you can't use it. Has to be three. So, if you take six next, you'll win. So, I need to take the six. Stop you winning. >> And you haven't won, have you? No, I think I established you couldn't win. So, I think I've got four and a two, which makes six, and if I add a nine to that, Oh. You had me. >> I think I have 15. >> I couldn't have stopped you. It's one all. I should quit while we're drawing. Have you got the hang of the game? >> I got the hang of the game. >> Okay. Well, maybe we should do the classic thing when a puzzle emerges or a game emerges, have a think about the strategy because I think we should reveal some of the hidden strategy. But, it's always nice to have a think about it first. First of all, let me establish that I think it's crucial if you know how three digits might make 15. I don't think this is a controversial claim. You're You're nodding. I agree. So, I'm going to write down some ways to make 15. So, I'm going to deliberately take the biggest number I can, which is the nine, and think about what else I could take to make 15. And I can't take an eight, a seven, uh a six because that would make 15. So, I think that the next biggest I can get >> Six. You could take six, but it wouldn't use three numbers. >> That's right. Sorry, it would make 15, but not in the rules which say exactly three. So, I'm going to take a five, and that leaves me with 14. So, that is a combination that could win this game. And I'm going to try and proceed with this, and basically I'm I'm making three-digit numbers in descending order which will help me check whether I've missed any and when I finished. So, I think we could take a nine and take a four, and then I'd have to increase this one, so that would work as well. And I could take a nine and take a three, but then I'd have to take another three. So, I mean, it's worth realizing that's not okay because I've only got one three in the mix. So, that's not there. I think then I should just reduce the nine by one to go with eight. You didn't do reduce to two because you'd already done that. >> Exactly, yeah. And actually, if I keep the numbers uh going down in descending order, but also going across in descending order and make sure that I don't need to check when they they flipped around. But you're right, two and four would work, but they've kind of got it. And the order doesn't matter when you win this game, they're just in the mix. So, if I have an eight, I could have a six with it, and that would get me to 14, and then I'd have a one, and that would win. And then I can kind of reduce that. Five and two would be fine. Pretty sure we've got one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight. And actually, I can see that some numbers are more useful than others. For example, one has turned up twice. Maybe one is useful. Uh nine has turned up twice, but compare that to eight, three times. Maybe I'm going to claim that eight is more useful than a one in this game. And even better than that, I think five, four of them. So, what I can do is use the five. I'll place it down here, and I could build one of the combinations. That's one of the combinations, and I've put five in the middle because what I'd like to do is also put down with some of the other combinations that use the five with like in the same thing. So, I'm kind of listing these in a different way. So, we another one with a five is an 8 5 2. Well, the other thing I should be careful about is that the one only gets used twice. Whereas the two one gets used three times. So, I might need to use that slightly differently. I wonder. I'm going to put two here. Well, maybe not. See, I I feel like I want to make some vertical rows as well. I can make these vertical things, but I think a two and a one won't work cuz none of these have a two and one. So, I could go there. I know there's one with a two and I'm already thinking I I might know what has to go there. But, this two and the five need to go with an eight. So, I'm going to put the eight there. This is going to start to write itself. I think you can begin to see what's happening. That diagonal is a winning combination. That row is a winning combination. A two and a nine would have to go with a four. That column is a winning combination. A four and an eight go with a three. It's coming together, Brady. And now I'm forcing myself into it. Uh three, five, and a seven. A two, a seven, and a six. It's like magic. They're all in. This is a magic square. This is the magic square. This is the 3 by 3 magic square that uses the digits one to nine. Every column, every row, every diagonal adds to 15. And I dare say some of you were shouting at the screen, "It's a magic square." Because there are eight ways to do it and there are eight columns, rows, and diagonals in a magic square. And if you are familiar with magic squares, it's kind of like, "Of course it is. I've seen it before." If you've never seen a magic square, maybe the first time you see it is a really nice thing. It's a nice mathematical artifact in its own right. But, I wonder what would happen if we played the game again with the awareness that all the winning combinations are now baked into this pack. Brady, let's play again. Do you want to go first or second? I suspect you have been thinking about something familiar. Don't spoil it yet. Do you want to play first or second? Um first. Okay. What number do you want? I want the five. >> You've told me the five is like all powerful. All right. Let's put it put it in your set. Um I'm [laughter] going to I'm going to take the two. Uh there it is. There's my two. Okay. So, does that mean I should take I'm looking at this. The two and the five are gone. I'm wondering if that means I sh- Well, remember you've got the five. >> The two and the five are gone. You've got the five and I've got the two. Okay. So, I'm going to take the four. Okay. You're taking the four. >> I'm not even doing the maths anymore. I'm just looking at it. Uh okay. Fine. I'm going to take Well, I better take the six. Suddenly realized I better take the six. Yeah. I'm not even Okay. So, okay. So, I feel like I need to take that eight. The eight? Okay. You can have the eight. >> [laughter] >> Oh, no, wait. I've got the six. Okay, fine. But, you've got four and an eight. So, I'm going to take the three. So, I've got the five and the four, but you've got six. And I've got Can I Can I lose at this point or is it already dead? I'm just trying to figure it out. It's definitely possible with this game to get dead. I result in a forced draw. Let's play it out because everybody is watching crying out for us to write something down to keep track of what's going on. But, finish finish the game. I know what I want to put on there as well because I'm trying to hold it in my head. So, five, four, and eight. Uh well, I'm going to just comment that I've got a two and a six in my hand. Oh, yeah. You Oh, okay. Yeah. Yeah. So, I need Yeah. All right. I'm with you. Yeah. And then uh you've got a seven, a five, a four, and an eight. I think it's all over now, isn't it? Hang on. Wait. I'm still struggling. This is ridiculous I'm still struggling. I think if I take the one uh we're okay. Okay. >> I haven't won, and you've got the nine. I haven't even been adding them up, but I know I haven't won. We've both been crying out to write something different down while playing the game. Should we replay that game? What what what game are you thinking of? >> Yeah, noughts and crosses. >> Yeah, I think I think everyone's thinking of it. Do you want to be noughts or crosses? I'll be the crosses. >> Okay, so you went first and you took a five and that's equivalent to claiming that square. I went next and I took a two and that's equivalent to me putting a nought there. Then what happened next? Did you have a four? Does that sound familiar? Yep, I did a four. So there's a cross there and I eventually I think eventually realized that I should block you and took the six. I mean, I played a terrible move if I was thinking of noughts and crosses cuz What did you do next? Well, Did you do the eight? >> I shouldn't have done that, but what I should have then done was um yeah, I should have obviously You should You should have blocked me, but I think you took the eight. >> Well done. What's interesting is that So you were sitting there, I took the eight, you were sitting there with the two and the six. >> And I hadn't even done the adding up and I didn't take the seven. I think I panicked about this. Yeah. Cuz I was half thinking about the game noughts and crosses half thinking about 15s, but I tried to block you by taking the three. Stupid me. You could have had You could have had me. I think I then pointed out that I had a two and a six. So you took the seven. It's ridiculous. And then I took a one in my old panic and you took a nine. And we got a draw which nobody who's played noughts and crosses before will be surprised about and yet this isn't noughts and crosses, this is a 15 game. Except it is noughts and crosses. It's not only like noughts and crosses, it is noughts and crosses. It's exactly the same goal, outcome. What's different is the visualization. So, you did have a chance to win, but you didn't because of you know I was playing badly. Cuz we played badly. But perfectly played, this will always be a draw like noughts and crosses. >> Right, and there's lots of videos even on Numberphile about how noughts and crosses actually is a dull game because once you've got the basic strategy, you can always force a draw if you play sensibly, which >> [laughter] >> I wasn't doing. We still got a draw. What surprises me about this game, I think, is that when I play the 15 game with the numbers, particularly if I don't see that grid or I haven't memorized it, I find it really hard to play well. It turns out I still find it quite hard to play even if I have got the grid, but for me, when I understand the magic square exists and if I just play noughts and crosses, I have no problem forcing a draw. The game is trivial. And that for me is a big penny drop moment and it describes quite often how I feel about mathematics. When you get the revelation, you see a problem turns up I I've I've no no idea where to push or how to solve it and you spend ages battling around feeling stupid and other people who might see it you being stupid. No, but then we suddenly get the right diagram or the right visualization or an alternative way of framing it, it not only becomes easy, it becomes really obvious. So, I think it's a really nice metaphor for all of maths. It's also a lovely game, the 15 game. If you want to play with someone and know the secret, just put a magic square grid uh on your hand or or in your head would be better. I haven't managed to do that yet, clearly. That's the 15 game, which is disguised noughts and crosses. A quick but exciting message from our channel sponsor Jane Street to let you know they're accepting applications for their AMP. Jane Street, as you probably know by now, is a world-leading global trading firm and AMP is their Academy of Math and Programming, which this year runs from June 29 to July 31 in New York. It's for recent high school graduates with an interest in math and computer science, but who may have experienced barriers to accessing [music] educational opportunities. Jane Street covers everything, travel, accommodation, food, you name it. It even gives attendees a $5,000 scholarship towards future education. No experience necessary, just be curious and excited about learning about computers, about mathematics. All the details can be found on Jane Street's website and via the links I've shared below in all the usual places. 15 game. This is the game we played. You can pick a digit and it goes into your pile. The next person can pick a digit goes into their pile. And we can play like this until someone wins. I'm pretty much playing at random, so don't hate me for not knowing what I'm doing. Uh we won that. No. Are we going to get a draw by a fluke? Yes.
