# The Bridges to Fermat's Last Theorem - Numberphile

Источник: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nUN4NDVIfVI
Канал: Numberphile

Well, the usual way that people um discuss it is to talk about perfect squares first. So, if you have studied the Pythagorean theorem, there's a formula that the square of the hypotenuse is the sum of the two squares of the sides of a right triangle. So, you might ask if the sides of a right triangle are whole numbers, might it happen that the hypotenuse is also a whole number? They're called Pythagorean triples. and the Greeks figured out all of the Pythagorean triples. Okay, so what happened next is I think it must have been very natural to look at the equation a cub + b cub = cubed and a 4 + b 4 = c 4th and so on. So this is now in the realm of algebra and you can plug in values for a and b and you'll see that uh these equations infinite number of equations seem not to have solutions. Well, so the story is that Fairma was reading the text of Daphantis, who is the Greek mathematician best known for this type of problem. And in the margin of his copy of Daphantis, he wrote some marginal note saying that I can prove that for higher exponents bigger than two, there are no positive integer solutions. And then famously, he said, but my solution is too long to write in this margin. And um in his copy of Daphantis which was inherited by Fairma's son Samuel Deerma there are many many marginal notes and Samuel published a revised version an annotated version of Dantis' book in which all of his father's writings are reproduced. And the reason that FMA's last theorem was called Fairma's last theorem is that all of the previously um examined marginal notes proved to be correct or at least they were um proved to be correct or incorrect mostly correct by mathematicians after the 17th century. And there was this only one assertion that remained. It was the last one on his hit list. And you know again I'm not an expert in the history of mathematics but I think most people are convinced that when FMerma was a mature mathematician he realized he did have no proof of this thing that he wrote in the marginal note and in fact later in his life he devoted a lot of attention to special cases of that type of equation. It's not just the cubes, but it's the cubes and the fourth powers and the fifth powers and so on. And Ferma himself later in his life took care of the fourth powers. Well, the cube certainly must have bothered him cuz he after all he knew about squares and he knew about fourth powers and cubes right in the middle. The theorem is that there is no solution. There's no whole number solution. That's right. Yeah. Would it have been or would it have been more exciting or more attractive to a mathematician to prove him wrong and to find these three numbers that you could plug in that would do it? Would that be would that have been more triumphant? Well, it would have been would have been very exciting. It would have made lots of news and then the the proof so to speak would have been simply um a single counter example that would have fit you know very neatly in a newspaper column you know and there would have been some story you know mathematician in Australia finds the first counterexample to fair's last theorem certainly was big news either way um the main thing about fair's last theorem is that over the centuries it gave rise to a tremendous amount of new and fruitful mathematics that people really developed new techniques to try to solve that equation that proved to be, you know, infinitely versatile. So, a bit like going to the moon, let them develop lots of other technologies along the way. This was this was the going to the moon of mathematics. That's that's a fine analogy. I mean, you when you formulate a problem in mathematics, no one knows whether this problem will really be helpful for mathematics as a general enterprise. And you know for whatever reason Fairma's equation has led to a tremendous amount of of new mathematics. So when I was a graduate student we're talking you know roughly 40 years ago or 45 years ago theorem was kind of um some curiosity. Everybody knew about the problem but no one really had any approach to it and there was no kind of fundamental reason why the problem was going to have a positive solution and when I was a student there was a tremendous interest in what are called elliptic curves and it was realized around 1968 1969 1970 by Andre V and Goro Shimura in Princeton who built on the work of Utaka Tanyama who was his buddy in Tokyo in the 1950s, Tanyama had passed away and there was this gradual understanding that elliptic curves really were related to modular forms and again that was some completely u apparently inaccessible outstanding conjecture and it was thought to be an incredibly hard conjecture and then in the early 1980s a mathematician came around and I say that literally because you know he was sitting here in this office uh his name is Gard Fry at the time he was at the University of the Sarlons in Zarbrooken. Um, and he came is that a famous one? I don't know that one. Well, um, I didn't know it either. And he came around and he had this scheme for relating Fair's last theorem and the modularity conjecture. Somehow he realized for the first time that um if if he had a solution to Fairma's equation, this would give him an elliptic curve which apparently could never be modular. I was a little skeptical because I knew that some of the things that he said that he needed in his argument um were very hard. Well, for me a a really important thing was in 1985, Jean Pierre, who's one of my mathematical heroes in Paris, sat down and kind of tried to distill everything that had been said about Fry's idea. And he came out with a very clear letter and this letter basically said if you can prove this tiny little result which he called epsilon because in number in calculus epsilon is a small number. He said if you can prove this tiny little epsilon then you can really show that the modularity conjecture which he called ve at the time implies fair's last theorem. So epsilon became for me a holy grail because not only was it something fairly well encapsulated and very clear and this was the kind of thing that I'd thought about before without success but nonetheless while thinking about yet another problem it occurred to me that I really had some new information that I could possibly bring to bear on this epsilon. What I first did was say to myself, what's the simplest possible case where I can think about this? What's the simplest possible prediction? I tried to settle that. I said, well, you know, if you have to start somewhere, can I look I know about this simplest case? So, I had this thing in my mind and I thought about it off and on during the academic year 198586. And during this year, I was teaching calculus. I was busy with things there. you know, colleagues come in, they want you to be on committees. And finally, um, my final grades were submitted in May 1986. And I started thinking about this problem again. First I was on the east coast for a while going to Europe and um, then I found myself in Paris and finally I found myself at an empty desk in the Mox Plunk Institute in Bon where I could just sit and think and I thought about this yet again. Is that what you do? Did you just sit at a desk with your head in your hands and think, think, think think? I mean, what if I was a fly on the wall when you were trying to crack this problem? What would I have seen? What does it look like? Well, it's probably, you know, I had a probably had a pad of paper in front of me and a pencil or a pen. We didn't really have computers quite yet, although they were starting to come. And when you visit some institute, you don't have all your stuff with you. You don't have lots of books. You don't have all your paraphernalia. So, I was really just kind of sitting there like that. And I started writing, you know, and I if if you look in my office, you'll find lots of old pads where I sit and write and you know, the page might start, what do we know? What are we trying to do? Let's summarize the situation so far. Let's let's try this. And um to my astonishment, um I was finally able to um to to crack that problem, the simplest case of epsilon. So inspiration comes at pre-ordained times. It's like you sit down and say, "Okay, for the next 2 hours before I meet my friend Bob for a hot dog, I'm going to have an inspiration and try and solve the problem." And that's when it happens. It doesn't happen at odd times when you're lying in bed or Oh, it can. I mean, if you if you think about something very intensively, then you just carry it around with you and um you know, lots of my colleagues say that while they're swimming, they had some insight or you know, lots of people say in the middle of the night they jumped up and they said, "My god, you know, why don't I try the minus sign instead of the plus sign?" Um, and and this this can indeed happen. You know, not for you, though. You're at the desk kind of guy. I I I think in this particular situation, I was at the desk. I knew for the first time that I could do something that I hadn't done before, that no one had done before. This was a special case of this so-called epsilon. And I kind of wrote it and rewrote it just to make sure I was really right. And finally using um the very first Macintosh that I had access to, I typed out a letter to Barry Maer at Harvard and I sent him this letter explaining what I'd done. And um then I spent weeks and weeks trying to do the general case. I couldn't see what to do. And then fortunately uh there was an international congress of mathematicians. They occur once every four years on the campus of UC Berkeley. So I was right here. I came back in August for this uh international congress and Barry Maer was there and um I spoke to him and I said, "Barry, you know, I sent you this letter explaining how I did a special case and I really wonder, you know, what I have to do now to do the general case." And he looked at me completely quizzically and he said, "Well, but you've already done the general case." And basically he um when he read my letter, it just seemed obvious to him that there was this extra little thing you carry along as a supplemental object and this extra thing would just do the bookkeeping. And um so we sat down at this cafe strata which is at the corner of the Berkeley campus and we had a cappuccino and he kind of said, "Well, you just carry this around with you." And and I was astonished, you know, it was like this um amazing moment where all of a sudden I realized that um in principle at least there was no obstacle to proving this this epsilon conjecture. I mean it's like you know my god you know it's some special thing you know an angel comes down and a a light shines from the heavens or something. Um so this was uh really quite a thing and um since all of my colleagues were walking around the campus in this big international congress I kind of told you know a number of them that I um have done this thing you know of course in the beginning I was cautious I said well you know I think I've done this thing um and but people kept running up to me and they said well is it really true you've done epsilon I lived in a and think I still do where my colleagues are very generous with attributions and praise and there isn't too much of this kind of race to be the first to publish and people basically I had little fear that someone would try to scoop me on the other hand what was a little worrisome was that I hadn't written down all the details you know so I kind of had written down very closely the special case but I hadn't kind of worried about writing the thing more generally So what happened was that during the year following that 198687 there was a special program on algebraic geometry and arithmetic geometry at the mathematical sciences research institute in Berkeley the MSRI. So I was up there with my colleagues and I gave lectures every week. I gave another lecture. I was kind of giving like a mini course on my proof and um when I wasn't lecturing I was furiously typing into the computer to try to expand and revise my manuscript and kind of more and more details got put in and there were certainly people in the audience who were appropriately skeptical. They asked me hard questions and I didn't always know the answer to the hard questions. you know, well, how do we really know that this thing is in such and such way? And I would say, well, you know, this was proved in in the 1960s by Grotenv, but it isn't quite written down in the place you expect. And then I'd have to go find an argument. Well, epsilon was not small. It was clearly a misnomer. And let me just get up and um pull off a reprint, which here's my article, was published in in 1990. um which um really makes a lot of time between 1986 and 1990. How many pages? So it went through it's like a book. Well, it's it's a it's more than a pamphlet. If if you open up this paper on the very first uh or second page there's Fairma's equation and an elliptic curve, but then they disappear. If you look at the actual article, it's more about the technicalities of the subject. It was a big deal in mathematics. It got um it got writeups in the press, including Science magazine, if I'm not mistaken. You know, whenever there's a serious announcement of a major theorem that gets a lot of attention and people stop what they're doing to try to see what the basis of the proof is. Who uh who calls it Rivet's theorem? You don't obviously you don't get to make that name up. that just sort of evolves, doesn't it? Whenever a mathematician does this. Well, um, yeah, that's right. So, you certainly there there's a general aversion to naming things after yourself. So, very often people will give lectures and they'll say such and such theorem and then parenthesis they'll write the name of the person who um proves it. And if it's a theorem that they prove themselves, typically they write the the first initial, their last name or something like that. or else they they don't um they don't add any attribution and the listeners understand well this is the theorem that the person is is providing in this lecture you've done this thing which is important you've built a bridge between two things which neither of which are on solid ground yet though well that's right so the um what what I what I showed was that this modularity conjecture which was thought to be was was felt to be true but um wasn't expected to be provable um I showed that that thing actually implies Fairma's last theorem. I think the main takeaway from my theorem was that um since the vague conjecture of Shoratanyama was likely to be true that now you should think that Fairma's last theorem was likely to be true. For example, it probably wouldn't have been a really good idea to spend a lot of computing power looking for a counter example to Fairma's last theorem. Where was Andrew Wilds? He was in the room. Well, that was the whole thing. So, Andrew Wilds, you know, of course he he came around a few times, I guess, but basically he was holed up in his attic and I didn't know that and I think most people didn't know that. So he was um I mean it's his um it's his statement that he was uh certainly intrigued by Fairz theorem as a child and that he soon as he heard about this bridge he decided to try to prove the modularity theorem because of its relation to fair last theorem. So was it is it sort of the situation that Andrews wanted to prove for Mars last theorem by any means possible and you'd given him a new means? That's what he says. I mean it this is surprising to me because the modularity theorem by itself is a tremendous prize and you know it seems kind of strange that you needed the motivation of Fairmont to go and try to prove it if you thought that there was some way that's not strange to me. Well, anyway, that's that's that's that's what he says. But yeah, so we were all together, meaning kind of lots of people in the subject in a conference in Cambridge, England in June 1993. And usually you go to a conference and you see the list of speakers and you know, each speaker has an hour and the thing had been set up so that Andrew Wilds had three hours. Um, so he asked the organizers, he said, "I have something I want to discuss and it will take me three hours and I'd like those slots." They said, "Okay." Um and then in the first lecture you could see he was proving uh he was starting to prove the modularity of some class of elliptic curves but the class of elliptic curves at least in the first lecture had no intersection with the class that you needed for fairma's last theorem but then the second lecture got a lot closer and um it became more and more apparent to people at the conference that in the third lecture he was going to be able to do enough to get fair last theorem. the crowd was growing. So a lot of the mathematicians you know brought their colleagues who happen to be in Cambridge and you know some of their family members and um I think uh there was little doubt that he would announce a proof of fair's last theorem. So I came and I sat in the front row center and brought my camera and snapped a picture of it. That was another moment when you know this kind of time stopped and when I first realized what was going to happen. Um and then you know when it actually did happen there was this um frenzy of activity. I mean the the director of um the Isaac Newton Institute where these lectures were held um had ordered a case of Napa Valley Brute Champagne for the end of the lecture. And as after the lecture, we came out into the, you know, common area and the these all these champagne flutes were produced and these bottles started popping and, you know, it was it was kind of really an amazing thing. Between the time when you you built your bridge and you published your paper and this lecture, did Andrew WS ever call you or write to you and ask for your help or Not a word. Not a word. You had no idea. I had no idea what he was doing. Um, you knew who he was though. He wasn't like a nobody. He was Oh, absolutely. He was he was a friend and a colleague. I first met him when he was a graduate student in Cambridge. And in fact, when I first came to Berkeley the first year that I was here, he was one of the first people that I invited. He came and spent a week and gave a lecture or two. Um, do you like that? Do you like that he kept it a secret? Does that make it like a nice surprise party? Or to this day, do you feel baffled by it? I mean, you seem a lot more collegiate. You're telling me when you solved your thing, you were running around telling everyone and he's he's quite secretive. Well, it's very unusual behavior and u you know you can say in retrospect that it was really um justified because he was afraid that people would kind of jump all over it because of the importance of the modularity conjecture and fair's last theorem. Um but he he did not um tell me what he was doing. He did um confide in two of his colleagues at Princeton as he was giving his graduate course where he was working out the ideas that um were instrumental in his paper. I think it was only a few days later that I got a copy of this manuscript and the manuscript was very thick, you know, it was like 300 pages um single space, you know, type set by um tech mathematics type setting program and um we were supposed to be the kind of referees um looking at different parts of the paper and I was assigned to a part that um turned out to be problem free. Um and um Nick Catz looked at a part that turned out to have problems, a problem. Was that shattering for you or was do you like that? Does it make you think this is good? You know, I like the rigor. I like this is how mathematics works or was it really deflating after the high of the the champagne? You mean finding the problem? Well, um, one one of the, uh, aspects of the whole thing is that I had gone out pretty far on a limb, um, telling everybody that Andrew Wilds had proved this thing. Um, and the way that started was that when the New York Times first heard about his announcement, they asked to speak to him and Andrew turned to me and said, "Ken, you know, you you speak to Gina Colada." So I went and um went upstairs and um spoke to her for a very long time explaining the whole thing and then um somehow the media kept calling me because it was understood um that somehow I was his designated spokesperson. So I spent that entire summer um lecturing about his theorem and um fielding phone calls from um the press. How long how long after the wilds announcement did cats find the the hole? Oh, I think it was like two weeks. What happens in mathematics is if if you have a proof that seems to really be um seems to have a lot of um internal logic to it and there's something that's wrong with the proof, your immediate reaction is to say, well, you know, this is just some technical problem that I need to fix. And I think that uh Andrew Walls when he found out about the gap um expected that he would be able to repair it in short order. So it it really took a while before there was um realization on his part that this was a serious problem that couldn't be fixed um immediately just by the tools in front of him. If you were the person who was taking all the calls from the press for whatever reason, did that mean you were you were contacting Andrew Wilds a lot and saying, "Can you give me an update cuz I'm getting all these calls, mate, and I don't know what to tell them?" Like, were you calling him for updates so you knew what to say or was he had he gone to? Not especially. He he kind of went dark. He was working on on mathematics and uh I wasn't wasn't getting a lot of um information out of him at that time. You know, it was all poison the balance, right? I mean um wasn't clear whether or not this would get repaired or not. And uh then you know wonderfully it turned out that there was this uh repair to the proof um really some completely new insight actually by Andrew Wilds and Richard Taylor who worked together over the summer and this would be the summer of 1994 and uh they had a a preprint out in in the fall of 1994 where they explained their new method which is now called the Taylor Wilds method and um that really um circumvented a lot of the more complicated arguments in the original preprint and the two articles were published together uh the following summer which is the summer of 1995 in the annals of mathematics. It it it was a relief, but it was it was not a kind of joyous relief, you know, and Richard Taylor came to me one day again at MSRI where I happened to be in fall of um 1994 and he said uh we have some good news for you and then um the next day he handed me a copy of this paper. So that that was kind of very good and um you know I don't remember there being a huge celebration on the on the moment of the release of that reprint but it just kind of gradually built. People understood that the proof was complete and then there was a very large instructional conference at Boston University in the summer of 1995. Different people got up and explained the different elements of the proof. Well, it it was a fabulous piece of mathematics. um as impressed um by what what I did, as impressed as I am by my my own work, I'm I'm even much more impressed by what they did. Um they had some really new insight and this insight has um percolated through our whole subject for the last 20 years. Um, one way to say what they did is they showed that somehow modularity is contagious in the sense that if you have something that has a little piece of it being modular, you can parlay that into modularity of a full object. First of all, Wilds was obviously intensely driven to do this. He was really motivated and he said, you know, I'm going to do this one way or another. and he brought in all sorts of different techniques that hadn't been related um to the the problem before. Um what's what's amazing, for example, there's a whole subject in algebraic geometry called deformation theory that was going on when I was a graduate student that I didn't learn. I thought that was really far removed from anything involving elliptic curves. And um in the years before Wilds's announcement, Barry Maer had developed this new technique of deformation theory in Gala representations. And it turned out to be exactly what Wilds needed, the language and the techniques that he needed for his discussion. Um and so you know something that seemed to be far away technically turned out to be crucial. Well, I think um you know just informally everyone referred to it as the proof of Fair's last theorem. But in fact when you when you looked at the article just like my article it was it was something internal to um the theory of modular forms and galler representations and wilds article and my article share the trait that fairma's equation occurs exactly once in the article in the beginning and then you get down to the real stuff. I'm very happy with the um recognition that I've gotten and uh I'm very proud of what I did and um I when students come into my classes they they know about my role in Fairmont's last theorem. A lot of them have seen the video that was broadcast on Nova and BBC. And uh I think you know if if you do something very very very very famous then you have an encore problem where people say you know what great thing are you going to do next and uh I try to be um more or less a normal guy and um not you know walk around with angels on my shoulder. Desperate to rediscover what Fair's proof might have been. Is it widely held that he had done it or had he just claimed like was he telling the truth? I I think by the time we get to the 20th century, it's quite clear that this is an incredibly complex
