# The Weather Equation - Numberphile

Источник: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YmZiq00CO60
Канал: Numberphile

Now, this is one of the most famous equations in meteorology, and I'm just going to go ahead and and write it down. So, we have sigma del squared omega, so where the omega comes from, plus f squared d2 omega by dp squared. So, this is the omega part, and that equals f times the vertical variation of this term here, which is the advection of the absolute geostrophic vorticity by the geostrophic wind, and the advection of geostrophic wind the temperature gradient. Wow. This is the quasi geostrophic omega equation. So, this is a fundamental equation that allows us to, through systematic simplifications, a lot of simplification actually, get the vertical velocity from the advection of this quantity called vorticity, and the advection of this quantity called temperature, so with thermal advection, vorticity advection, and by looking at horizontal maps of these advections, we can diagnose vertical velocity, and vertical velocity is a proxy for development. And development is your developments of your lows, your developments of your highs, high pressure and low pressure, and that relates to the weather forecast. So, what this tells you what's going to happen in the future? No. So, there's quite an important distinction about this equation. This does This tells you nothing about the future state of the atmosphere. So, this isn't a predictive equation. It's It's It's called a prognostic equation. This is a diagnostic equation. It just allows us to diagnose the vertical velocity from the advection of vorticity and the advection of temperature. And why is that an important thing to know um if it doesn't tell you anything about the future? >> Well, so this I mean, we we can go into this in a bit more detail later on, but this essentially is one equation that falls out of a whole system called the quasi geostrophic system, and I want to kind of go into a bit about what we mean by quasi geostrophic omega. But, essentially the quasi geostrophic system is a systematic set of simplifications to the main primitive equations which numerical models these days used to forecast the weather. Um it's a a systematic simplification of those equations that could then be used to make the first kind of workable forecast models that were used on the computers back in the day in the early 1950s. And so this equation is a diagnostic equation that falls out of those and it is part of that forecast process whereby you would calculate some tendencies of various things. You would then get the wind fields which you could calculate wind and thermal fields which you could calculate vorticity and the thermal advection and from that you could diagnose the vertical velocity. And getting to this vertical velocity is actually quite difficult and so this equation gives us a a method to to actually do that in a systematic and relatively error-free way. In even more simple terms then this is quite Is this equation relating to up and downness of the air? What's it like What's What's it like? >> Yes, exactly. So when when we're talking about vertical we're talking about the motion of the air in an up and down sense. So on on large scale so the scales of weather systems the main the major motion of the atmosphere is in the horizontal. So you've got winds north to south, winds east to west. We don't tend to think on large scales about the winds that are going up and down but they are there. If you think about a convective cloud for example air moving up into clouds, connecting to clouds and you get rain falling out. Um but on these large scales so we're we're talking about big scale weather systems here. You know systems the size of the UK, systems that that that sort of take up a big proportion of the Atlantic. You don't tend to think about vertical motions there but they are there and they're necessary in order to develop the areas of low pressure and develop the areas of high pressure. So if you have rising motion you get development of low pressure at the surface and if you have sinking motion then you have development of high pressure at the surface. One more basic weather question before we you know get our teeth into this, then. I'm pretty familiar with measuring wind speeds horizontally. I've seen those little devices, like those little cups that spin around and things like that. Are there devices that measure the up-down wind, the vertical wind? Like, how do you How do you guys take measurements of that? No, it's very difficult. And that's one of the reasons why we kind of look to equations to to diagnose the vertical velocity. It's very hard to measure. It's on a much much much smaller scale than the the horizontal motions. And in fact, you can try and calculate the um vertical motion from the horizontal motions by something called the continuity equation, which we'll have a look at in a little while. Um but that relies on you knowing to a very high degree of accuracy your horizontal winds. And it turns out that the the divergence and the vertical motion errors in that are the same size as the actual vertical motion you're trying to diagnose in the first place. So, you can have small errors in the wind that can lead to massive errors in vertical velocity. Just quickly, what are the things that measure the wind speed called? >> Anemometers. An- Anemometers. >> Anemometers. Anemometers measure wind speed >> That's right. horizontally. Yes. Are you saying equations the likes of these are kind of what you have instead of those for vertical? That's how you get to the vertical velocity. Yeah. So, let's break it down. So, um first of all, there's the omega equation. So, let's talk about omega. So, we've got this Greek letter omega here. So, omega is just the vertical velocity. So, it has a equivalent called W. Um these two are equivalent, but they use different coordinate systems. So, for example, if we think about W, this might be a little bit more familiar. We think about a coordinate system that has winds in the XY This is like your XY plane, and then you've got a vertical plane. If you have some vertical motion, or if you have a horizontal motion, we can have a a U wind in the X direction, a V wind in the Y direction. So, these are horizontal winds. And then W would be um the wind in the vertical. And that would be measured in meters per second. There is a direct equivalent though in a different coordinate system which we in meteorology we like to use because it has some good advantages when coming to equations like this and looking at things like mass continuity. We still have an XY plane, but we use pressure as our vertical coordinate. And so if we have vertical motion in the pressure coordinate, and we can use pressure as a coordinate because pressure always decreases with height. So it's around about 1,000 millibars at the surface, 1,000 hectopascals. At the top of the troposphere, which is the top of the weather bearing layer, is around about 300 hectopascals. So pressure always falls with height. So if you're moving in an upward direction, you're moving towards lower pressure. Ascent in the the geometric coordinate system would be W. Ascent in the pressure coordinate system would be negative omega because you're going towards lower pressure as you go up. Whereas in the geometric system, you're going towards kind of higher elevations as you go up. So does that mean we're using on our X and our Y axis here, we're using different units cuz that's presumably still meters per second? >> That's right. Yeah. So this we still have a U wind and a V wind in meters per second. >> But we're using a different unit on that. >> Yep. The unit for this one would be pascals per second. It's it's the amount of pressure change that this parcel of air is is experiencing per second. So very much like your your speed would be the amount of displacement you experience in per second, meters per second. This would be the the pressure change per second, pascals per second. Okay. Cool. You can you can link the two via something called the hydrostatic equation. So we have this hydrostatic equation which relates the rate of change of pressure in the Z direction with this term minus rho, which is the density, and G, which is gravity. You can say that if you treat omega as the material derivative, which you can expand out to this expression here. And we're going to assume something called a hydrostatic balance. And what hydrostatic balance effectively means is that if we have an atmosphere that's at rest and we have a particle or a parcel of air in the atmosphere, it's got two forces acting upon it. We've already said that pressure decreases with height. So we've got a pressure gradient in this direction. So this parcel is experiencing a pressure gradient force in that direction. And then we've got a gravitational force in that direction. So we've got pressure gradient force and gravity. And when these two are in balance, now if if there wasn't gravity and there was a pressure gradient force, then this parcel of air would fly up into the atmosphere cuz it'd be the the higher moving higher pressure to lower pressure. It'd be pushing up to into the atmosphere. But because it's balanced by gravity, the the particle or the air parcel is at rest and we call this hydrostatic balance. So we assume the atmosphere is at rest. There's no U, there's no V, there's no pressure change with time. So we can say that omega is approximately equal to W DP by DZ. And then from this hydrostatic balance relationship, which we kind of expanded out here, we can say that omega approximately equal to minus rho G, which is this term here, times W. So what this effectively tells us is that omega and W are related, but omega is just a scaled version, scaled by the density because because the atmosphere is more dense at the surface. So if you have a parcel of air that's moving vertically at fairly low elevations, the pressure is quite high. Because the atmosphere is more dense here, the pressure levels are kind of closer together and therefore the same vertical speed in height coordinates at lower levels would be crossing more it'd be the pressure would be changing more at lower levels than it is at higher levels for the same vertical speed when you're thinking about the change in meters. So this is what this equation tells us. Omega is just a scaled version of the vertical velocity in hot geometric height coordinates, but it's scaled by the density to account for this effect. Woo. Want another piece of paper? Yeah, I think so. All right. >> [music] >> The main takeaway about omega is it's the vertical velocity in a pressure coordinate system. Okay, so there's a few other symbols that we uh that we want to look at here. Yep. So, we're going to just focus on the left-hand side at the moment. Right, so this is sigma. Sigma scales the vertical velocity response for a certain size of forcing. This all taken together gives the three-dimensional distribution of omegas. The distribution of the curvature of omegas, so it doesn't necessarily give us omega itself yet, but we'll see how we can retrieve omega from this side, but it tells us something about the three-dimensional distribution of omega. Now, these terms on the right-hand side, let's break this down. So, this this is a zeta. The G means geostrophic, and I want to delve a little bit more into what geostrophic means um in a second. But this zeta G plus F, this tells us the absolute vorticity. Vorticity is effectively a measure of the spin in the atmosphere. Any atmospheric process where you've got things spinning around, any fluid spinning, you have vorticity. And these two different types of spin that we've got make that make up the absolute vorticity are the relative vorticity. So, relative vorticity is just the spin if you put a paddle wheel in the flow. Say you've got some flow coming down here, and you've got a lesser flow here, and you put a little paddle wheel in the flow. Well, there's more pressure on in the flow on this part of the paddle wheel than there is on this part. So, this paddle wheel is going to start to spin. So, the fluid at this point would spin in that direction, and that's the vorticity. Now, this would be a shear vorticity because the it we've got a shear. Um fluid parcels are moving faster here than they are here. You could have a curvature of where simply the flow is curved. And so if you put a stick in the flow here, it would curve. And so it again, you've got vorticity through through curvature. So, vorticity or spin can come out through through different mechanisms. Z to G here just tells us about the vorticity of the flow. Now, this F, this is the planetary vorticity. And this is just vorticity that you have even you have it, Brady, just by virtue of being on a spinning Earth. So, anything that's on the Earth apart from on the equator has some kind of spin about its local vertical. Yeah, if you think about the globe, it's spinning on its axis. So, if you were at the North Pole, you'd be experiencing that full planetary vorticity, the full spin of the Earth. You wouldn't be able You wouldn't know it was there because you're kind of spinning along with it. Everything that you can see is spinning along with it. So, you wouldn't know it's there, but it is it's spinning. And you can pick any point on the Earth's axis, and you can decompose its spin into a component about its local vertical. And the equation for that F is equal to 2 * another omega, but this is the big omega, sine of the latitude. We calculate what our planetary vorticity here at the Met Office headquarters is in Exeter. If we take this equation here, so F, which is our Coriolis parameter, is equal to 2 * omega. Now, omega from memory is something like 7.292 * 10 ^ -5. This is in radians per second. So, this is just the the number of radians that the Earth is turning per second. So, that's a constant. This is a constant. This is a constant. The only thing that varies is the latitude. And we take sine of the latitude. I don't know what it is in radians, unfortunately, but because we're taking the sine of it, I don't think it matters too much. Sine 50°. And that turns out to be, if you go through the calculation, it's approximately 1.1 * 10 ^ -4 per second. So, that's the planetary vorticity. So, go back to the equation, the relative vorticity of flow plus the planetary vorticity, that's the absolute vorticity. But, this little quantity here, this little del symbol, means that we take the gradients of that. Gradient means that the absolute vorticity is changing in space. We take the gradient of that and we do a dot product with the uh wind velocity and that gives us the advection of the gradient. So, it's how the wind is blowing along the vorticity gradient, kind of tells us You can imagine that's the advection of the vorticity. If you're going from an area of high vorticity to an area of low vorticity, you're blowing the high vorticity towards you and therefore you've got positive vorticity advection. I'm beginning to get some appreciation as to why weather is complicated. Well, I That's a really good point and and when when people say when we say oh weather forecasting is easy, isn't it? I just look out the window, then my temptation is to point them to stuff like this and say, "Well, actually, there's a lot more to it than that." Um so, this is the vorticity advection part and we'll come on to kind of what that physically means. And that's why. Um this is the temperature advection part. So, very much like we had the gradient of temperature, this is a bit more simple, you can just think of this as temperature. We we But, we've got the temperature gradient and again we're advecting that with the geostrophic wind. And these features in in front of all of this, well, these are This is just the gas constant. This is pressure. This term This little expression here means not only we're taking the gradient of absolute vorticity and advecting it with the geostrophic wind, we're actually taking the vertical variation of that, which is what this d by d p term tells us and then it's scaled by the Coriolis parameter f. Even you know this is ridiculous. Even you know this is ridiculous. All right. Yeah. So, before we get to how we use this equation as weather forecasters and believe it or not, given all the complexities in a conceptual way, we still do use this equation, which is um fascinating to me because if you think about the quasi-geostrophic equation set, which was derived to make the first workable numerical models. Well, pretty much all of the rest of that system has not for well, it has fallen out of use as models have got better, supercomputers got faster, but the one kind of enduring thing that we use as forecasters is this QG omega equation, which is why it's such a famous equation of meteorology. Um and it's why it's so interesting to me. But we're a little we're a couple of steps away, I think, from kind of understanding what this physically means. And I think we need to go on to talk about geostrophy and what geostrophic means, and then we can talk about what quasi-geostrophic means. So, should we have another piece of paper? Yes, we shall. >> [music] [music] >> We've talked about what omega means. Uh I just want to spend a little bit of time about talking what geostrophic means, and then by extension we can go to quasi- geostrophic. We can go back to my lovely rendition of the globe here. We can imagine a weather system on this, and you know, this might be something quite familiar. If you imagine it this might be like a typical weather map that you would see with an area of low pressure. And when you see the forecasts on the TV and they show the the pressure maps, they often show the winds. If you look at how the winds are blowing, you find that one, they blow counterclockwise around an area of low pressure. And two, they tend to blow parallel to the isobars, which is quite surprising if you think about it, because if you think you've got a region of low pressure, that's a bit like a vacuum cleaner. And if you think about what happens when you turn on the vacuum cleaner, it sucks up all the dust and grime and sucks up the tube, and it's creating an area of low pressure, and the wind is effectively blowing in towards that vacuum. So, why doesn't it happen um on our planet? Uh and the reason for this is because um as well as the pressure gradient force, there's another force that we have to take into consideration. So, if we simplify and we think of our air parcel moving, this is like the pressure gradients are the same as on the map, but we'll just imagine we've got an area of high pressure here and an area of low pressure here. Now, at the moment, we don't really know anything about the direction of this, but um it will be blowing in this direction. Um it's Buys Ballot Law, actually, which says if the wind is in your face, so if you were standing here breathing and the wind is in your face, uh you would have low pressure on your right. >> In both hemispheres? Uh I have to think about that one. Um so, in the Southern Hemisphere, the wind does blow clockwise around an area of low pressure. So, if you were standing if you were facing the wind, it would be to your left. Yes, it would be the opposite. That's right. Not that we're happy hemisphere Not that we're happy. >> [laughter] >> No, we're not discriminating against either hemisphere. We're hemisphere agnostic. >> Mhm. So, we would have a pressure gradient force in this direction. And if that was the only force acting, then the air parcel, instead of going in this direction, would go towards the low pressure. But it turns out that's exactly balanced by this other force. And this is the Coriolis force. This is, well, it's a little bit controversial as to what you describe it. Some people describe them as fictitious forces. Some people will describe them as forces that you have to include in the equations of motion in order to make it appear as if we're not on a rotating planet. Because, although we are on a rotating planet, we can't really judge that. But the motion the the fluid motion the motion of the air parcels knows we're on and so you see some odd behaviors. And one of the odd behaviors is if you have an air parcel that starts to move from high pressure to low pressure, it will feel this Coriolis force acting and pulling it to the right. And so, as it moves, it will continue to feel this force until eventually, and the pressure gradient force is always acting in this direction, and it will continue to be pulled to the right until the Coriolis force and the pressure gradient force balance, and then we end up with this what we call geostrophic flow. So, geostrophic just basically means there's a balance between the Coriolis force and the pressure gradient force. So, it's not fictitious. Well, the pressure gradient force isn't fictitious, but the Coriolis force is kind of fictitious because it's a it's a correction that we have to add to account for what we see. Coriolis is a really interesting character, and one of the roads around the Met Office is named after him. It's of such fundamental importance to weather prediction. We can look at the equations of motion. Um so, I'm going to write down the equations of motion. Now, you you've done the Navier-Stokes equations. These equations of motion are sort of analogous to the to those. And if we take the uh equation of motion in the X direction, so this relates the acceleration of the U wind. So, if you remember going back to our coordinates, we had a U wind in the X direction. So, how the U wind is changing with time is the acceleration in the U direction, and that's equal to this term here, which is the pressure gradient force in the X direction, and this is the Coriolis force, and then we've got some frictional terms. And this basically boils down to F equals MA, Newton's second law. So, we've got our forces on one side, got our acceleration on the other side. If we apply it to a parcel with mass one, unit mass, then we end up with basically A equals F, F equals A. So, this is Newton's second law in a nutshell. And I'll write just quickly write out the one for the V cuz it follows a very similar pattern. So, there's a pressure gradient force in the Y direction. Coriolis term is minus FU, and then plus some kind of frictional forces. When we look at geostrophic balance, um we are assuming first of all, we're assuming there's no friction. So, we can't really apply geostrophic balance at the surface, and that is why when you see winds blowing around an envelope pressure, and you look at the surface winds, they're not quite parallel to the isobars. They're actually just pointed in slightly towards the low pressure. That's because this frictional force is having a drag effect. It's pulling the winds in towards the low pressure. So, the geostrophic approximation is is a good first approximation for calculating the winds, but it's it is an approximation. Um partly because these frictional effects, but Well, that's dragging along the ground. It's drag- It's exactly that. Yeah, it's experiencing a stress against the ground. It's losing it It's losing momentum. It's falling slightly down the pressure gradient um rather than just going around it. And therefore, the eventually the winds will kind of curling into the the center of the low. And if there was no process above the low to kind of get rid of uh air or mass, then that low pressure would just gradually fill up and would become not a low pressure anymore. So, we can get rid of these frictional forces because they're in the geostrophic system, we consider them negligible. And also, we need to have a non-accelerating atmosphere. So, an acceleration could be a speed up or a slow down, or it could be a curve because anything that's moving in a curve is being accelerated towards the center of that curve. Anytime you introduce an acceleration and change the strength of the wind, you change this Coriolis force term because Coriolis term is a function of the wind speed itself. Is the sun pumping a whole lot of heat into the system not going to cause things to speed up or accelerate? So, at the moment, we're kind of we're neglecting that. We're We're The sun will have uh an impact on smaller scale. So, if think of that convective cloud we talked about, that cumulus cloud, sun heats the ground and introduces all kinds of motion. But, the the these the scales that we're talking about, these very large scales, the the direct heating input from the sun um is not so much of an effect. It obviously has an effect. It creates the conditions necessary to drive weather. Um but, it's not incorporated in this simplified system. So, yeah, anytime you introduce an acceleration, um you will disrupt this force balance because the Coriolis force is a function of the wind. So, if you change the winds, you change the Coriolis force. These forces are no longer in balance. And therefore, the flow wouldn't be geostrophic. So, basically, we just ignore the accelerations as well. And this gives us our geostrophic balance. So, it essentially says this pressure gradient force and this Coriolis force balance. And I can just explicitly show that by taking the pressure gradient force over to left-hand side of the X equation and similarly to the Y equation. And then we can divide both sides by F. And this gives us an expression for our geostrophic wind. On that diagram of the earth, when I said, you know, you look at the you look at the winds on the forecast map, and the two of first order approximation, or to good order approximation, the winds are geostrophic. They blow parallel to the isobars. And you can calculate those winds. So, we're at a point now where Remember when you said, um, "Can you not measure the the the vertical velocity? Can you not measure it?" Well, we can measure the horizontal winds, but the problem and calculate the vertical velocity from that. But, if you remember the problem from that is that we we have slight errors in our wind measurements. The measurement the wind measurements are quite sparse, so we don't know what's happening in between. And the errors introduced by those measurements dwarf the vertical velocity itself. But, we've got a situation here where we could actually, if we just know the pressure gradients and the Coriolis parameter, which we can calculate, we can actually calculate the winds. So, we don't need to measure them anymore. We can calculate them exactly. Where do you get the pressure gradients? So, measurement of pressure at the surface, you would just use an instrument called a barometer. So, that's the that's the pressure kind of equivalent of an anemometer for the wind. So, we've got a barometer and an anemometer. Measuring pressure through depth, um, as a slightly different story. We can cover that another time. One of the reasons I wanted to just describe geostrophic wind is because I wanted to show you that you can A, connect the vertical motion to a a which we call divergence, but B, the geostrophic wind can't necessarily help us with this. All right, so I want to take the equation for mass continuity, du by dx plus dv by dy plus d omega by dp equals naught. So, you've heard of the principle of conservation of mass. This is the meteorological equivalent of this. And what it tells us is that if we rearrange this, we can say that the rate of change of the U in the X direction rate of change of the V wind in the Y direction is equal to minus d omega dp. Now, we've got some quantity with omega, which is vertical velocity, and this expression here is identical to something which we call the horizontal divergence, which is this product here. So, if physically you just think about that as air in a column, if the air is moving apart out of that column, you've got divergence of the wind, and that generates through this equation some kind of vertical motion. Basically, though, all that energy of the wind has to go somewhere, has to do something. It's not the energy, it's the conservation of mass. So, if you're removing the mass in a horizontal direction, then you've got to accumulate the mass from the vertical direction. But, the problem with the geostrophic wind is we can calculate the divergence of the geostrophic wind. If we plug this into this equation here, so if we call this dug and dvg instead, then we could take d by dx and d by dy of our geostrophic winds, we can plug these geostrophic equations in. So, du by dx d by dx of this equation here minus one over rho f dp dy plus and d by dy of minus one over rho f dp dx plus one over f that's that one there. And you can see here we've got basically a dp a dx dy, a dp a dx dy. We've got a plus one over rho f and a minus one over row F. So, the two terms cancel out and that equals zero. So, this is quite an important result that the divergence of the geostrophic wind is zero, but we need the divergence in order to say something about the vertical motion. So, this brings us back to our quasi-geostrophic omega equation. Yeah. All right, so we need a new piece of paper. All right, let's do it. Let's do it. >> [music] >> You're just talking about the geostrophic system and one of the assumptions that is made when you go from the full primitive equation set to the quasi-geostrophic equation set is you assume that the atmosphere is in geostrophic and hydrostatic balance. We can't assume that it's completely in that way because as I already showed you the geostrophic wind is not divergent, so we can't get vertical velocity from the just the pure geostrophic winds. So, that's where the quasi comes from. When you do a systematic simplification of the equations, you have to retain the full wind in just enough terms in order to be able to find vertical velocity, but remove it from as much as possible in order to make it as simple as possible. And that's where quasi-geostrophic comes from. But, you might ask how good an assumption is it to say that for the types of weather systems that we're considering, so the areas of low pressure, high pressure, and the fronts, and the cloud, and the rain, how how relevant or how appropriate is it to say that the atmosphere is in geostrophic balance? And so, I just want to introduce this cool number called the Rossby number. It's what we call a non-dimensional number. So, it doesn't have dimensions and it's made up of a series of variables, but it is a number and you can use it to show things about uh geostrophy and and and what have you and the rest of it. So, how do we get to the Rossby number? So, Rossby comes from Carl-Gustaf Rossby. He's a famous meteorologist from the early 1900s. He's, as far as I know, the only meteorologist to have ever appeared on the cover of Time magazine amongst many things, one of his claims to fame. He derived this number called the Rossby number, which is essentially the ratio of the acceleration of the flow. So, going back to our equations of motion here, the acceleration of the flow to the Coriolis acceleration. And we take the ratio of the acceleration of the flow, which in scale analysis terms is So, du/dt is some kind of speed scale over some kind of time scale. So, I'm using scales here because eventually I want to think about well, what's the typical scale of our weather system and plug and plug this in and get a Rossby number. So, this this is our acceleration and this is our Coriolis, which is F Coriolis force F times Coriolis acceleration equivalent F times a speed scale. And then we can just simplify that to say V is the same as V over f t v. The V's cancel. You get 1 over f t. Now, it's not quite the quite the Rossby number in the form I want to show you because what I want to do is take the kind of speed equals distance over time equation, very simple. So, speed equals distance, so a length scale divided by a time scale. I'm just going to substitute t in for that. So, that gives t equals L over V. And we plug that t into there and we end up with 1 over f times L over V. And we actually just flip that upside down, put it on the top. This gives us V over f L Rossby number. So, this is a a dimensionless number. If you plug in the scales, so you've got velocity in meters per second, this is in per second, and this is in meters. So, you've got meters per second over meters per second. The dimensions cancel. But it allows us to say something about geostrophic flow. Velocity of what? Of the wind? In the meteorological system, we're talking about velocity of the wind, but it could be velocity of wind in a tornado. Velocity of wind in a large area of low pressure. The length scale for tornado would be of order 100 m. But the length scale for a large scale weather system would be of the order of 1,000 km. So, um this is the Rossby number. It allows us to say well, how geostrophic is our flow? So, if you just plugged in pure geostrophic flow, well, the length scale of pure geostrophic flow is infinite. Or you can another way to look at it is the acceleration is zero. So, you end up with zero over this. Rossby number equals zero. So, for pure theoretically pure geostrophic flow, Rossby number is zero. What we're showing here is that as the Rossby number gets smaller and smaller, zero is the smallest it can be, but as it gets smaller and smaller, the more towards geostrophic the flow gets because the Coriolis is more dominant than the flow acceleration, which matches our Coriolis force here. So, for a synoptic scale system, you know, the typical wind speed might be 10 m/s. You know, 1 m/s too too slow, 100 m/s too fast. So, typical probably 10 m/s. Typical length scale might be of order 1,000 km, as we said. So, Are you saying for all the all the points along those 1,000 km, the wind is that speed? >> Yeah, well, >> Cuz the wind speed is always like in one position, it's a certain speed. >> That's right. Yeah, but we're thinking about the orders of magnitude here, rather than exact values at the moment. So, when I'm thinking about the length scale, I'm thinking about the over cross entire low pressure, it's about 1,000 km across. So, low pressure is about 100 km across, that's quite small for a low pressure. 10,000 km far too big. So, 1,000 is about the order of magnitude. So, this is what we're thinking about orders of magnitude here. And we already calculated that the F for our kind of, you know, rough mid-latitude location is of order uh 1 * 10 to the minus four, which is what we calculated earlier. Then, if we plug them plug these into the Rossby equation, then we can say that Rossby number for synoptic scale flow is 10 / 10 to the six * 10 to the minus four, which equals 10 over 10 squared, which is 10 over 100, which is 1 over 10, 0.1. >> Rossby number 0.1. Okay. Yeah. So, the Rossby number for your typical synoptic scale weather system, so your typical areas of low pressure and high pressure is around 0.1. That's very close to zero, so that tells us that to a a very good approximation, the winds around areas of low pressure and high pressure can be assumed to be in geostrophic balance, which is this balance between pressure gradient and Coriolis force. So, Rossby number is like a little waiting you add to tell you It's almost like a Is it almost like an error bar or how close you are to this ideal that you wish you had that would make life easy? >> Yeah, you could you Yeah, you can think of it like that. Yeah, the smaller it is, the closer you are to geostrophic balance. And you could bung in You could bung in for, say, like, um I don't know, the eye of a tropical cyclone where yeah, the wind speed 100 m/s maybe a little bit too strong, but we'll we'll go with it. A typical length scale of the eye of a tropical cyclone, maybe 10 km, which would be 10 to the 4 m, and tropical cyclones tend to form at lower latitudes. The Coriolis parameter is maybe an order of magnitude smaller. And so, if we bung these into our Rossby uh number equation, then we get V 100 divided by 10 to the 4 * 10 to the -5, which is 100 over uh 10 to the -1. It's 100 over 10, so it equals 1,000. Wow. >> [laughter] >> That That you can see is a massively different Rossby number to a synoptic scale system. So, the type of balance we're looking at when you're thinking about the force balances in a tropical cyclone eye is not geostrophic. It's something we call cyclostrophic, um which is a different balance altogether. But, that's what's really cool about this Rossby number. You can plug in the scales of your system under consideration, and it quantifies how good the geostrophic approximation is in your system that you're looking at. >> [music] >> Right, so here's our quasi-geostrophic omega equation. So, we talked about omega, that's vertical velocity. We've talked about geostrophic, that's kind of balance between pressure gradient force and Coriolis force. Now, this is quasi-geostrophic because when you go from the full primitive equation set and you simplify it down using systematic scale analysis and simplification, you need to retain the full wind in some of the terms in order to produce vertical velocity as I showed you through the continuity equation. So, you can't have everything geostrophic because if you did, you would remove the information about the vertical velocity. Um so, that's what makes it quasi-geostrophic. It's not quite geostrophic, but it's it's near enough. Now, is the Rossby number in here? Rossby number is not in here. No. No, unfortunately not. Okay. But, it is a cool number. So, when we think about this So, the whole the whole point of me explaining to you this to you is to get to the point where I can show you how we as meteorologists use the principles contained in this equation to help us diagnose things about the weather. Now, to get that What we do is we tend to partition these two sides into something called the response and the forcing. So, as meteorologists, we are basically looking at weather maps of vorticity and maps of temperature or or thickness as we we like to look at it and we look at those as the forcing terms and it's this that's forcing a response in in vertical motion. And through vertical motion, we can say, right, where is low pressure likely to develop? Where is high pressure likely to develop? So, although you know, you asked me, can you predict the weather using using this equation? Because this is a diagnostic equation, it doesn't tell you anything about how the velocity field is changing in time, then strictly speaking, you can't. However, you can when we look at subjective assessment of this, use it to make inferences about where areas of low pressure going to develop, where we're going to see an increase in shower activity, where high pressure is likely to develop. And so, just looking at this response term here, so this is in the vertical velocity. Unfortunately, it's This is a very complicated equation, and as humans, we still can't quite look at this and look at the maps and immediately map one onto the other. Um we have to make some further simplification. So, one simplification we make, this is this tells you the three-dimensional curvature of omega. Now, you can do some reasoning and um you know, you could say that omega is varying sinusoidally um as a function of pressure. So, basically, what that means is you could express omega as sine p, and if you differentiate this twice, you end up with d2 omega by dp squared equals minus sine p, which is minus omega. So, we can make similar arguments to this side of the equation, and we can basically say that all of this is proportional to minus omega. And if you remember minus omega from our um when we looked at the system of coordinates, minus omega corresponds to ascent. So, we actually by assuming some kind of wave-like distribution of the vertical velocity in the horizontal and the vertical, we can make a good assumption that this response is broadly equivalent to ascent. So, what are the forcing terms? Well, we've got the vertical variation of vorticity advection. So, what what does that mean exactly? So, want to think about an atmosphere that's got a trough in it. So, this might be the 300 millibar surface, and this might be the 1,000 millibar surface. And this is a trough. We're always looking for where the troughs are, where the ridges are, because the troughs and the ridges in the upper air usually correspond to where the high pressures and the low pressures are in the lower atmosphere, although there's a they're not quite to colocate in the vertical. They're they're displaced one way or the other. But, if the geostrophic wind is blowing uh advecting this area of positive vorticity, so trough is an area of positive vorticity, in this direction, at some later time, this trough is going to be in this position here. Now, if we look at what's happened to the thickness of the atmosphere and the thickness is just the distance between the pressure levels. We call this H bar and the thickness is a effectively measure of the temperature. If the mean temperature of the air is colder than the thickness becomes lower. If the mean temperature of the air is warmer than the thickness becomes higher. But at this location here at some time not we've gone from H not to H one. We've gone from a sort of relatively large thickness to a lower thickness. Now, what does that mean in terms of the temperature? It means that the atmosphere here is cold. However, we've got no we we got nothing about temperature advection here. We're not thinking about this term at the moment. There's no mechanism by which we can cool the atmosphere and if we didn't cool the atmosphere, then either it wouldn't be in geostrophic or hydrostatic balance. So, how do we cool the atmosphere? Well, we basically have some vertical motion. We have a scent. If you have a parcel of air and it rises, rising air expands and it cools. So, this process of vertical motion cools off the atmosphere and this is what the omega equation tells you. It tells you what is the vertical velocity that I need in order to cool the atmosphere enough to reduce the thickness enough to accommodate this vorticity advection. And you make you can make a similar argument for this. You can introduce some thermal advection and that again if you have your same pressure levels and you introduce some warm advection, maximum warm advection, you would increase your thickness because you've introduced warmer that bulges up the contours of the pressure levels at height. And what does this bulge do? Well, it's it's the inverse of a trough basically. It's a ridge. It has negative vorticity. If we've got no mechanism to generate vorticity through vorticity advection, well, how do we generate vorticity? We diverge. This is the ice skater effect. So, if you have an ice skater who's spinning round and then they pull their arms in, they'll spin faster or if they pull their arms out, they're spinning slower. Well, to reduce the vorticity, if the atmosphere pulls its arms out, vorticity will reduce and will create a ridge. And how do we get this atmosphere to do this? We have vertical motion. Cuz vertical motion goes up, it hits the top layer of the atmosphere, it spreads out, and it creates the necessary vorticity in order to keep the fields in geostrophic balance. So, these are the forcing terms. How do we use them? Why do we use them? Back when the QG system was first developed, this was a really key tool into identifying exactly where the vertical motion was. The best way to get the vertical motion from these forcing terms is to calculate it with a computer. That's kind of how they did it. But as forecasters, we we can't do that. We can make these assumptions and we can look at the fields. We identify where the vorticity advection is. We identify where the thermal advection is. And if you've got positive vorticity advection, if you've got warm advection, that corresponds to negative omega, which is ascent. And so, by looking at a map of vorticity, you can immediately see where the areas of vertical motion, you know, ascending limb and the descending limb are going to be. And that also comes into its own when the forecast model, which can calculate vertical velocity, you know, you know, high-performance supercomputers and really sophisticated models, they can calculate vertical velocity, but they can also be wrong in the positions of the troughs and the ridges. They can have errors. And we can look at satellite imagery and we can diagnose where these errors are. And we can say, "Right, well, if this trough was a bit further back, what does that mean for the vertical motion field?" We can We can always calculate it in our head and make a forecast based um on that. So, although this equation comes from, you know, deep meteorological history, um it's part of an equation set that's no longer used in much simpler times in numerical models, um it's still used in practice on the bench, although with a lot of a lot of assumptions, lot of simplifications, in order to give forecasters this conceptual model of the atmosphere where the things are ascending, where things are descending, and therefore where areas of low pressure, where areas of high pressure developing. But you don't crack out the equation and put numbers in it. You use more this kind of response and forcing >> Exactly. Yeah, we look at where the we look at where the vorticity advection is. We look at where the thermal advection is. We diagnose qualitative qualitatively whether it's ascending or descending. Because we can't calculate the magnitude of these terms in our head, we can't say anything about the size of the response. And there there are occasions where one force in term will say ascent, and one force in term will say descent. And then we have other techniques that we can use to kind of break the tie. But in very qualitative terms, yeah, we're looking at the vorticity advection and the thermal advection, and it tells us whether we can expect upward motion and development of low pressure at the surface, even development of, you know, if it if it links in with a strong frontal gradient that can lead to development of a potent area of low pressure and a a named storm, or whether we're looking at descending air and development of high pressure and more settled weather. Well, you made it this far, so well done. If you'd like to hear more from Dan, more of a personal interview, a bit about his life, his nickname at [music] school, his first job as a forecaster, his backyard weather setup, that's something you don't want to miss, then check out the Numberphile podcast. It's a great interview and one not to miss. the result to also just have a tiny little change. Quantifying tiny, but not to blow up to infinity. That wouldn't make sense cuz I've changed something so so small. Why have I got an entirely different solution? >> [music] >> We've also been taught that butterflies flapping their wings can cause cyclones. The butterfly effect is like a chain reaction. It's one thing leads to another leads to another. But in the in the sense of having an equation, you input something into your equation. It's like a function machine. You input some initial condition,
