# The Anti-Knight Killer Sudoku - Numberphile

Источник: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eB0-vG6rSM4
Канал: Numberphile

The last time, uh, I was on Numberphile, we talked about something called the Fist-o-Ma-Fell Ring, which is a pattern that exists in all Sudoku puzzles, and Brady was kind enough to allow me to draw draw it out again here. So, you can check this at home when you do your next Sudoku puzzle, you'll find that the 16 digits that ring the central 3 by 3 box are actually the identical 16 digits to the 2 by 2s in the corner of your Sudoku. Different digits for each Sudoku, but in any one Sudoku, if you study that ring, you'll find it's the same for that Sudoku as exists in the corners. And we proved that in the in the last video. That was invented by this German constructor, Fist-o-Ma-Fell, about 4 or 5 years ago. Did he invent it, or did he discover the trait? Good point. Good point. He did Yes, he discovered it. He discovered it that it was a pattern that exists in all puzzles, and I suppose it's He's made it famous. That's That's very fair. But, he was sort of He was a pioneer, if you like, and there were others that followed who who built other things off that pattern, and it was one of those things that I wanted to talk about today. So, there's another constructor All All Sudoku constructors almost have strange names, and this one is called Potato Head 21. He created this puzzle. So, this puzzle, I mean, you can see it's got a very, um, prosaic name. It's called Anti-Knight Killer Sudoku. Okay, so the rules are normal Sudoku, which means we've got to put the digits 1 to 9 once each in each row, in each column, and in each of the bold outline 3 by 3 boxes. You've then got a few cages, which are normal Killer Sudoku cages. The way they work is that you For example, here, these four digits here have to sum to 15. These four to 11, these three to 12. Now, there is a special rule in this one as well, which is that cells a knight's move apart in chess cannot contain the same digit. So, imagine Have a look at the central cell here. Say this was a one, then if this digit is a one, you can't put a one here, here, here, here, etc. So, it can't be a single chess knight's move away. >> And now, I have seen Sudokus before in my life, and normally they throw you a few bones. You get a few numbers at the start to get the ball rolling. We've got nothing here. You've got nothing here, and actually, in in the world of variant Sudoku, that's becoming more and more common. It's actually a surprise in the world of variant Sudoku now to get given anything at all. So, this I mean, this was perhaps a little before its time, but it incorporated this beautiful pattern that builds on the Fist-o-Ma-Fell Ring. Can you solve this? Well, I did solve it, yeah, back back in 2021, but I will tell you it wasn't It wasn't my finest hour. Um, it took me 33 minutes to put one digit into this grid. Interestingly, when I came back to this puzzle when when I thought we might talk again, Brady, it took me 1 minute to put that same digit in. And viewers, your viewers might like to have a think about it in light of the rules and just see whether they can see how to even approach the puzzle. How could you get a digit into this puzzle? And I will give you a little hint, which is it might be something to do with the Fist-o-Ma-Fell Ring, and in particular, that knight's move. Does that change any of the properties? Does that result in any new patterns that we might be able to use to solve the puzzle? [Music] We're back from the pause. Some people may have got it, I don't know. I won't tell you the digit, but I'll tell you the principle, because I think it will surprise you. The The principle that Potato Head discovered is that in a Sudoku with a knight's move constraint, the Fist-o-Ma-Fell Ring must either contain all of the different Sudoku digits, or eight of them. It can miss one, but it can't miss two, okay? So, this ring here and these corners, you've got to have at least eight of the different Sudoku digits in them. So, so it's possible there's no seven, but it's not possible there's no seven or six. You've got it. You've got it You've got it in one. And let We can actually prove that if we if we think about how this ring works. So, the last video that we did together, we proved that the red cells are the same digits as the blue cells. So, let's imagine in this puzzle there was a digit that wasn't in the red cells, then we know it's not in the blue cells as well. And that means in these corner boxes, this box here, this box here, this box here, and this box here, this digit, this hypothetical digit, would either be in this little domino, or it would be in this little domino, and it would either be in this little domino or this little domino. Either in this little domino or this little domino, and either in that little domino or this little domino. So, it would always be in one of these positions. Now, the interesting thing is how these then interact with each other. So, let's imagine for a moment, let's use your example, Brady. Let's say that there there was a digit, and it's the digit seven, and it's in this position. So, let's write seven in there. We can then see that in this box, the seven is going to be on this domino. So, the seven is is going to be either here or here. It'd be be in one of those positions. And in this box, it'll either be here or here, and in this box, it'll either be here or here. So, if if we start with the seven being here, it can't appear again in its own row. We know it can't appear in the cells that are covered by the Fist-o-Ma-Fell Ring, so it's not in the red cells, and it's not in the blue cells. >> That's our That's our self-made constraint, yeah. Yes. So, it has to be in this domino here. And just for the completeness, if we'd started with the seven being in this domino, all that would have happened is that the sevens would have shifted their dominoes in each of the boxes. So, it would have been the same pattern, but symmetrically rotated. Now, the really beautiful thing about this is that because this puzzle has a knight's move constraint, I want to think about whether either of these two cells here could contain a seven. Now, what you can see is that this seven here, obviously we can't put a seven in the same column, so it can't be in this one. And because it can't be a knight's move away from itself, it can't be in this one. So, these two are out of bounds. But remember, if the seven had been up here to start with, the seven would have been in these two cells, and that would have had exactly the same effect on this domino because of Sudoku and the knight's move constraint. And that rule that we've discovered applies to this box applies identically to this box, to this box, and to this box. And that means if we now look at row five and ask where seven is, and column five and ask where seven is, in column five, the seven must either be It must be in one of these three cells. And in row five, it must also be in one of these three cells. And there's only one cell that meets those two criteria, and that's right in the middle of the grid. So, we know that if seven was a digit that didn't appear in the Fist-o-Ma-Fell Ring, it must be in the center of the puzzle. And then imagine, your example, what if six was also not in the Fist-o-Ma-Fell Ring? Well, our logic would suggest that six was also then in the middle of the puzzle where it where we've just put the seven. So, we can't put two digits. There must be If If a digit is missing from the Fist-o-Ma-Fell Ring, it's there's only one of them. And now, again, knowing this, this puzzle's beauty can be seen very much more quickly. So, the spoiler coming up now. Okay. >> Yeah. So, let's start with the 11 cage. There's only one way of making 11 in four different Sudoku digits, and that's with the numbers 1 and 5. Is that piece of knowledge just like something that Sudoku players, like you, just know all the time? It's like kind of like a chess >> Yes, it would be even more basic than a chess opening. Okay, it is Sudoku Killer Sudoku 101. Okay. So, let's go back to the puzzle, and we can see that these four corner boxes here correspond exactly to the the boxes in the Fist-o-Ma-Fell diagram. So, what we know is we've got to somehow fit at least eight different Sudoku digits into these corner boxes. And it turns out, because Potato Head has chosen these digits quite carefully, it's really hard to do that for the high numbers, especially, because 11 in four digits, that's going to be 1 2 3 and 5. 13, you could get a seven into a 13, but you certainly can't get eight or nine. 7 + 1 + 2 + 3 being the way you could get seven in. 12, you can't even get seven in. You can get six in to 12. So, immediately, if you know this trick, you know because the 15 could only have one of eight or nine, it can't have both, you know the middle digit is eight or nine. But actually, you've still got to deal with the four here as well, which is which is tricky, because if you want to put seven in, you've got to put 1 2 3. If you want to put six in, you've got to put 1 2 3 with that. So, the only way of making sure that you have eight different digits is if you fill the 15 cage with a four, an eight, a one, and a two. And therefore, the middle digit is nine. Okay. This fundamental property of Fist-of-Evil ring and this additional property about one number allowed to be excluded, no others. Is that a new piece of core knowledge that the solver would have had to have arrived at just just to solve this puzzle? >> Yeah. Yeah, so that I mean, when I first did the puzzle back in 2021, I didn't have this knowledge. And it was a big a huge handicap. Um so, I mean, you can watch the video. I flounder around uselessly and sort of it takes me ages to sort of grok eventually what's going on. And this is a nine, I've got a digit. 32 minutes, but I have a digit. It's just unbelievable. But it it's quite interesting cuz you might say, "Well, doesn't this pattern only exist in Sudokus that have this strange knight's move constraint?" It's actually a bit broader than that. So, imagine that you had the two main diagonals in the Sudoku not being allowed to have repeated digits. And forget about the knight's move constraint. Let's just say we've got a puzzle where the leading diagonals can't have a repeat on them. Then this principle applies to those puzzles as well for exactly the same reason, which is that the dominoes here are where you'd have to put the naughty digit. And then but you've still got to get the naughty digit onto the diagonals. So, it ends up that the naughty digit has to be in the central cell. In a normal Sudoku, the Fist-of-Evil ring always applies, but Fist-of-Evil ring can have all the digits. It can have all the digits. >> Yes. Yes, you're quite right. And you knew that wasn't the case with this puzzle because the knight's constraint created this Fist-of-Evil plus situation. It eventually I knew that. >> minus. Eventually I knew that. Yes, I I wish I'd known it before I started the puzzle. I would have looked cleverer. Um but but no, it's something I had to find out in that video. But now now knowing that little bit of extra theory, you know, you can you can blast through the puzzle. So, once you've got the nine, was it all pretty easy? Not not super straightforward, but much much easier. Yes. It became like a normal puzzle. >> Yeah. Do you know there wasn't another way to do it? Another another way to get that start, that foothold? There probably would be if you had it enough time, you could but because the constraints that give rise to the digit being in the middle, they they are there. It's just very hard to uh internalize them quickly unless you can sort of start to see, "Ah, okay, so that pattern that might exist in this box can be duplicated to the other four corners." If you if you're literally just going, "Ooh, okay, let's just focus on this square and think where it goes." It it takes a lot longer. And then and this is actually led to other puzzles. We've had we've had puzzles with the knight's move constraint where the only other rule you're given is that the Fist-of-Evil ring sums to 109. And your viewers might like to think about what that means given that you have to have eight different digits at least in the ring cuz 109 is quite a high number to get to. So, you have to sort of manipulate the nines, the eights, and the sevens so that you have as many of them as you possibly can while still also having at least a two, three, four, five, six as well. You can miss out the one, but you still need to have a two, you still need to have a three, you still need to have a four, etc. Could you miss out the two and keep a one? You could, but if you're trying to get as high you'll find 109 is quite hard to get to. So, you probably want to miss out the smallest one. And that was a Potato Head puzzle as well. This is just This is absolutely unbelievable. This is utter utter genius. So, Potato Head certainly understands this pattern very well. And has made some really wonderful puzzles. I'm always amazed by the minds of people who create these puzzles. It inspires me to get my own brain in shape. And one of the best places for a neural workout is Brilliant with its huge and ever-expanding library of courses and curios. Up your math game or computer science or pretty much anything else. It's all lovingly designed. It's smart. It's witty. And importantly, it's really interactive. If you want to get smarter or maybe start prepping yourself for new opportunities, new career paths, well, Brilliant is a great place to start. To learn for free, go to brilliant.org/numberphile. You can scan that QR code on screen. And of course, there'll be some links below. Plus, Brilliant gives our viewers 20% off an annual premium subscription, which gives you unlimited daily access to everything. [Music] And what do you eat for breakfast? Oh, I have my three oranges as always. Three oranges for breakfast? Is that all you have? I I I do sometimes have cereal and toast, but always three oranges because uh ever since COVID, I've had three oranges for breakfast. And in that time, although I did get COVID once, I've had one cold and one COVID. Wow. In however many years that is. Now, that might be because I never go out or I might Do you like bite Do you start eating the flesh like Uh so, it's the mini you like the mini uh mini peelers they're called so something like that. I just >> Like oranges or satsumas or Well, they're like satsumas, I suppose, but they're called mini oranges. But yeah. So, there you go. All right. That's uh I hope that makes it into the video. Yeah, there we go. You never know. Um I have I have been known to use the sound checks. Oh, really? If I get something juicy. Well, you did that before. >> I did there?
