# The Real Story of Calculus - Numberphile

Источник: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=G23Jx0kPCSI
Канал: Numberphile

So uh a wonderful physicist and mathematician professor PP Dvakaran who was uh retired from Tata Institute of fundamental research. It's a premier institute in India for physics and maths passed away at the age of 89 on 23rd of August and he was a close uh friend of mine. He has done incredible amount of work in particle physics and more recently in bringing Indian calculus that was done in 14th century and 15th century into the world. He has published a lot of papers on this topic and he has this wonderful book published in Springer and since he passed away I thought it's a great opportunity for us to talk about Indian calculus in the 14th and 15th century. >> Before you get there you say he's a particle physicist but he's also talking about 14th century or something mathematics. How come this man who's passed away was doing both of those things? >> Yes, great question. So actually he was mostly a particle physicist all of his life. Um he was picked up by a Indian national talent search uh in the 1950s and after that he went to Chicago for his PhD. He also came to Oxford and worked with professor Ditz. Then he returned back to India and become a professor in particle physics and did a lot of work on quantum field theory and particle physics. He retired in late '90s and after retiring he got a fellowship to visit other institutions in India. So he was visiting Chennai Mathematical Institute. That's where he came in contact with historians of mathematics doing research on Indian calculus. And since he was a mathematical physicist, he could read these books and appreciate it much better than purely a historian of mathematics. It's a fortunate thing that I I I met such a eminent person in my life. Um I knew about him from my friend circles from my professors a lot because he was wellknown. Um I met him twice in my life. Uh the first time I met when I was a first year PhD student and he was visiting my institute to give a lot of talks on physics that time not on mathematics. The second time I met him was last year and I spent about two months with him every day interacting all throughout the day. So in some in some sense I was kind of taking care of him while he was there. It's an institute called interun university center for astronomy and astrophysics in India and after I came back to UK we kept in touch we exchanged emails regularly mostly on physics and mathematics. So so we we knew each other very well and it's really sad that he passed away. >> Tell me about Indian calculus then because when I think of calculus I think of Libnitz and Isaac Newton. I've seen all the documents at the Royal Society. There was famously a dispute as to which one of them was first and things like that. You're going to tell me a different story via your friend. >> Yes. First of all, all credit to Newton and lies. Newton is one of my greatest heroes in physics because of physics reasons. But also he discovered calculus as well as lineness and so there's no connection between Newton's discovery and the discovery in India that I'm going to talk about. Coming back to Kerala school, Kerala in the modern India is a state, the southern state. It's a very intellectual state. It's well known for mathematics and culture and physics. In those days, it was under a kingdom called Vizay Nagaram kingdom. So 14th century second half. And there was a particular mathematician called Madhava who kind of immigrated from 200 kilometers up in north towards a place where he settled finally and built his school of mathematics. We know a lot about his mathematics because of his disciples. His students wrote a lot about all the theorems and and proofs but we don't know much about his life. We kind of know which village he was born in. So at least that much is clear. And we also know his birth year which I think is 1340. And very soon he he established the school which today we call Kerala school of mathematics. In in the western world it is known as that. But I think professor Dvakaran will call it nila school of mathematics. Now this word nila is a name of a river and the mathematicians sort of lived in villages around those river and it went on this school of mathematics for about 300 years. How kind of formalized would this what would this have looked like if I was there? >> Yes, that's a great question. So I think this was a gurugula culture in the sense the word gurukula means uh teacherhood in some sense. So the disciples or students would go to a grand teacher or a master and they would stay around that place and learn but it was not a big campus basically it may be just the house of your teacher and you live around it but again I'm not very sure in this particular question >> it obviously became the place to go did it and people who had an affinity with mathematics would travel there >> yes and I should say that this was also a place of cultural revolution in Kerala in the state the language is called Mallayalam it's Kerala's language and a lot of cultural and linguistic and even ayurvea revolution happened around that place. So definitely that was an important place. Most of the evidence that that we know in the modern day especially in the western world about uh the kerala school comes from a particular book. It's called yupti bhasa. It simply means the language of logic and proofs basically formal mathematics and it talks about the calculus that was done for the past and 150 years. This book was written in 1520s and Madhaba arrived in 1350s. So see the gap and it talks about several important things that we know in modern calculus. >> So this book that you're talking about which is talking about something that had happened hundreds of years before is already 100 years before Newton and linets. >> Yes. 200 more than 200 years before and it is well known now on Wikipedia on mathematical sources. All most mathematicians would know this by now. So it's an important uh thing. But Newton and Linets wouldn't have had access to this book. >> So of course I cannot deny but there's no evidence and I don't want to push that angle because you know um I have talked to professor Dwakaran who has read seven volumes of Newton's work and he says he did not find any evidence. The ideas were so different. The Indian cultural thinking was so different from the Renaissance thinking uh that uh it sounds unlikely but who knows. One of the fundamental things about calculus is measuring the length of a curve or an arc. The Indian mathematicians were concerned with measuring the length of an arc. It might have come originally from astronomy because you know planets rotate around uh sun and you need to cover their ark. The way Newton came to it was through motion which is very similar. You have a curve which is not linear. It's not a straight line. Your velocity is changing as a function of time and he wanted to capture it. So it's something which is changing as a function of time. The Indian mathematicians were concerned with circles. So they're looking at something which is changing as a function of theta angle. Okay. So how do you measure the length? If if something is linear, you know the length. If something is curving to calculate that length you have to discover calculus. So what you do is take a curved object like a like an arc and split it into small small small small segment and treat each segment as a straight line in the limit when the length goes to zero and then add them up and then you get dark. So they use this uh to find many important series. So they found the series expansion of sin x the so-called McLaren series. They found the series expansion of cos x and they found the series expansion of arc tangent tan inverse x which is very famous Gregory series. >> Okay. How different were the techniques they were using to what Newton and Linitz ended up using? If you map it all back is it all the same stuff fundamentally or is it really different? >> Fundamentally technique-wise it was exactly the same. The same techniques was being used. splitting a object into small small parts and taking a limit. So, so this was the first time in the history of mathematics where limits were taken carefully. Um, and um, uh, so it's same in that sense. It's different in the sense that Newton and Libanese talked about all sorts of functions. Any general function you give me, I can give you its derivative. I can integrate it. Uh, in Indian mathematical school in Kerala, it was only trigonometric functions because they were talking about circle. So that s cosine and tangent that's the main difference. Things like exponential function logarithm function never appeared in uh in the Indian school. I won't be surprised if they they they would have been able to do it but they were they got so concerned with the foundational issues that they they stuck to few classes of functions but went into foundational issues of how to expand a function add corrections carefully and carefully and carefully. So they spent all of those years focusing on that and circles were all they were thinking about. It's a sort of Indian thinking at that time. >> How did these ideas discovered in the Kerala school not spread around the world and become famous before Newton and linets were even born. >> There are multiple reasons why this could have happened. First of all, this happened in Kerala and this grand textbook that I'm talking about called Yukti Vasa was I should not say the word unfortunately but it was distinctively written in the local Kerala language mallayum and most scholars knew Sanskrit and they could read and understand Sanskrit. So the later scholars including western scholars could not get hold of a mallayalum book where detailed of complicated advanced proofs were written in that language. So that is one major reason. The second reason is Kerala was under Portuguese colony. So there were a lot of fights going on at that time. That's one of the reason why the school sort of declined and died and with that the mathematical culture sort of died off until it was picked up only 50 60 years ago. In fact a book that was written before this book by the previous scholar called Nilakanta few years before he wrote his book Aryat Bha. It's about the older Indian mathematician Aryot and what he did in Sanskrit and that was very popularly known. We do not know exactly why this book was written in the mallayalum language. Uh but once it is written in mallayalum language it was difficult to break through especially because the proofs that we are discussing are extremely formal series expansion power series expansion proofs which is which was not even conceived in the northern part of India at that time. What did professor Dvakaran have to say about this on like a personal level? Like did he feel pride? Did he feel an injustice or a sadness that it never got recognized sooner or what was his opinion about all this? >> Great question and I know this answer from him directly but also he has talked about it in many of the lectures. So before I answer let me give reference to some of the lectures. So he gave a set of three famous lectures at the international center for theoretical sciences. It's in Bangalore in India in 2020 and those lectures are recorded in a very nice high quality and one can actually watch and see all the proofs he's giving. So it'd be nice to watch those lectures but I've also had this conversation with him in person. He wasn't sad uh that it wasn't wellnown. He understood the reason why uh it's sort of nobody's fault. Nobody was maliciously trying to hide it. So he understood the complexity of reasons why but also he worked hard and uh got it out. uh so he was very happy with it and he went deep into it not just Kerala school he went back and back in fact this book that I'm holding is divided into three sections the first section goes to 1500 BC Indian number theory the second one goes to 500 AD aryavata so astronomy and mathematics and then finally this Kerala school of mathematics which is I would call as a very pinnacle of mathematics Madhaba was definitely the most prominent mathematician in the world in the medieval ages without sorted out. >> So he would have been known outside of India. >> It's only in retrospect. >> If somehow you know this had broken out of India and gotten into the western world at the time it was happening. Is there any speculation as to where mathematics and physics would be now? Would we be 200 years ahead? I think it would have accelerated a lot. But it also depends on western world understanding decimal system. You might know that Newton was intrigued when he had this polom binomial expansions and he was thinking of decimal systems and he's thinking this is a new paradigm but decimal systems has been used in India for thousands of years. So if people understood decimal system very well then it would have easily broken out. >> How do you feel about it? Do you feel a pride in this? Do you feel an injustice? What's your opinion of it having you know read the book and spoken to the man and understanding it more? Uh first of all I'm not surprised because I'm more I I'm an Indian so I know the cultural heritage of mathematics. So something like mathematics happened in India. I'm not surprised. If something like law of gravitation was known I might be surprised and be intrigued. Mathematics was was part of culture. So and proud I also feel proud but not necessarily as an Indian but as a scholar to know that this modern thinking of mathematics and calculus existed so long back and these people are thinking very very modern way of expanding functions and approximating them. >> This is just the sign function with two of a thing. There's this identity say it's the same as two lots of sin x cos x and trigonometric identities let you transform trigonometry into other book. >> So he kind of wrote a review of his own book which is you know >> he's cheating a bit. Is ting there?
