# The Holey Monster (with 934 faces) - Numberphile

Источник: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BhSlqIe1CRQ
Канал: Numberphile

I'd like to talk about this book uh which is this amazing maths book by a guy called Bonnie Stewart first edition 1970 this is the second edition which was revised in 1980 it's got some really fascinating geometry in it actually before we get into that I just want to take a moment to appreciate a couple of things about it so written illustrated and handlettered by Bonnie Stewart this whole book is written by hand in calligraphy all the pictures are handdrawn I mean even without understanding what it is it's just this absolutely magnificent thing and such a such a labor of love. Um >> it would have taken forever. >> You'd have thought so. I mean for me it would have taken longer than forever. My right handwriting is just nowhere nowhere near like this. Um it's magnificent. So I'm going to talk about what it is. It's called Adventures among the Toroids. Um and the the Toroids are a particular type of polyhedra that Bonnie Stewart started started investigating in this book. I'll build up to them. I think we need to work out work up to them. So when we're talking about polyhedra, I think you got to start with the platonic solids, right? This is this is this is the place to start. So platonic solids start with a cube. Okay. So let's think about the fundamental properties which make a cube geometrically interesting. Okay. So firstly, every face is a regular polygon. So regular polygonal faces with a cube that's squares of course. So regular polygon all equal length edges and equal angles. Okay. Other thing about the cube is that every face is identical or we might even say interchangeable. So it's not just that they're the same shape. There's a symmetry. Um you can take um one face to any other and the whole the face the shape of the whole thing remains unchanged. Right? So it's symmetries. So the faces are interchangeable. And then you can say the same thing for the edges. So the edges are interchangeable and the corners are also all interchangeable. And then actually quite a lot of the um the theory of polyhedra develops by just saying okay well let's just look at that list of properties and then slightly relax some or tweak some and you get a whole load of um interesting interesting other shapes. Okay for example suppose we wanted to keep everything the same but I'm no longer worried about the faces being identical. So if we do that then I'll show the computer over here. If we relax some of the um conditions. So if we relax for example the insistence that all the faces are the same shape then we can get shape like this. So this is called a cuboahedron and all its faces are regular polygons. Every edge is identical to every other. Just look at it. Every edge goes between a triangle and a square. Triangles are equilateral triangles of course. And every corner is identical to every other. Right? So it satisfies the other conditions but it's no longer the case that every face is identical to every other. And we get some more shapes. So we get uh this shape here. This cube octahedron. It's got six square faces like a cube. And it's got eight triangular faces like a ocahedron. That's why it's got the the combined name. And there's another like that. One more. Um besides the platonic solids themselves, you get this one here. This is the icosi docahedron. So you've got your docahedron. It's one of the platonic solids with 12 pentagonal faces. You got another one, the iicosahedron with 20 triangular faces. This is the combined shape the icosi docahedron and again you can see it satisfies all the conditions for the platonic solids except that not all the faces are identical to each other because you've got the pentagons and the the triangles. We can relax a bit more. So if we relax the constraint on the edges as well. So no longer require every edge is identical. They're always going to be identical lengths because all the fa all the faces are regular polygons. So the length of the edges are always going to be identical. They don't have to be uh in identical positions. So if you look at this shape here, this is a shape called a truncated cube. All the edges are the same length. But you see there two different types of edges. You got the ones which are between the octagon and the triangle and you got ones between two octagons. So the edges are not identical here. But every corner is identical to every other. And of course it's still the case that every face is a a regular polygon as it will be with all the shapes we'll see today. If we ask okay what shapes satisfy that combination uh where regular polygon faces and every corner is identical to every other um then what we get is shapes like this. These are the Archimedian solids. There are 13 of these. Um the truncated cube is one but there's also actually there's infinitely many shapes like this. So here's one. This is called a prism. And it almost looks like a circle but it's not a circle. That's a a 50gon gone or pentacontagon if you want to be Greek about it. So it's two 50gons uh joined by a a ring of squares. >> There's nothing unique about 50. That's just one you've arbitrarily chosen. >> Yeah. Yeah. And just to illustrate that in fact you can do it with any number, right? That's the point. That's why there's infinitely many of these prisms. And then um we can have another one. Uh so this is uh the similar thing, but it's called an anti-prism. So rather than being joined by squares, you joined by a ring of equilateral triangles. And again, there's infinitely many of these. You can do it for for any number. So you've got your 13 Archimedian solids plus these two families of prisms and antiprisms. So this one here is called the rumbosi docahedron. Again, property that every corner is identical to every other. All the faces are regular polygons, but obviously the faces are not identical and the edges are obviously not identical. And then the most complicated of these shapes is this one here. This is the truncated icosidahedron. We keep saying this word truncated. If you remember the truncated cube. So it looks like you've just started with a cube and chopped its corners off. That's what the truncating is. You can do the same thing with the icicosid docahedron which you saw earlier and you get the shape here the truncated icosi docahedron. So that's the sort of classical theory of polyhedra. It's been known for known for centuries. I mean is supposedly discovered by Archimedes these 13 solids although I think the original work is lost but it was rediscovered in the Renaissance but there have been some more recent developments. One of the recent developments uh was in 1966 when Norman Johnson basically asked about relaxing even further and said let's not worry about any symmetry of the whole shape. So we still want everything made out of regular polygons but the symmetry of the whole shape. So identical faces, edges, corners, we're not worried about any of that. Just what shapes can you make out of regular polygons. Okay. So um in order to think about polyhedra more broadly than platonic and archimedian solids and the prisms, there's an extra condition we uh we're going to impose which is called convexity. And this is actually a fundamental property in lots of different branches of math. And the idea is quite simple really. So here's an example of a non-convex shape. And the reason it's non-convex is that if I I can take two points here and if I join them with a straight line, that straight line goes outside the shape. So a shape is convex if you never do that. If whenever you take two points inside the shape and join with them a straight straight line, you always stay completely inside the shape. So this shape is obviously not convex because if you look at two of the sort of ends of the spikes, join them together with a line, then that line is outside the shape. So this is this is a non-convex shape. So yeah, I've drawn an example in two dimensions, but it all works uh just as just as well in in in three dimensions. So then Norman Johnson 1966 had a had a very clear question. What shapes can you build from regular polygons which are convex? And okay, we've got lots of examples already. We've got the Platonic solids, the Archimedian solids, the prisms, and the anti-prisms. What else? Um, so let's go back over here and see some of the Johnson solids. This is one of the Johnson solids. Uh, pretty familiar object. It's a it's a squarebased pyramid. You can use the whole zoo of regular polygons. No overall symmetry is required. So, uh, here's another one. This is the pentagonal pyramid. And that's those are the only pyramids we get because if you try and put six triangles in a pyramid, you get it lies flat. There's lots of other interesting shapes among the Johnson Solace. Here's one. So, this is a square cup. A lot of these Johnson solids are actually related to the Platonic or Archimedian solids. So this square cup is actually the the top of a one of the Archimedian solids. This is called a RMI cubahedron. And you can see uh the square square cup sitting on top, right? It's it's a sort of slice out of it. >> Yeah. >> And uh and likewise the square pyramid is half an octahedron. Um so a lot of these Johnson solids are sort of taken you get them by taking the platonic ordin just sort of chopping bits off. Here's another example. So this is one called a pentagonal rotunda. And this one you can see again it's closely related to one of the Archimedian solids. It's half of an icosi doahedron that we saw earlier. >> Is there a really formal naming style for these or is there a bit of freestyle here once you start making up your own shape? So you know you can start saying oh that reminds me of a ratunda or or we following a real nmane rules here. >> I mean as with anything um time freezes things right. So, uh, I think Norman Johnson had quite a lot of freedom to come up with the names, but the names he came up with have stuck. But, I mean, if you invent your own new shape, you can call it what you like, but then other people will probably follow in your follow in your footsteps. >> Okay. >> Um, so one other nice one. I think this is a really beautiful one. Norman Johnson listed 92 solids. This is his 92nd. So, it's the last one in his list. It's called the triangular hebispheno ratunda. I think it's a really elegant and beautiful shape. And it also has an interesting property. Of all the shapes we've seen, all the Johnson solids, Platonic solids, Archimedian solids, this is the only one where you're seeing um triangles, squares, pentagons, and a hexagon all in the same shape. >> Oh, here's a physical one. >> We've got a physical one there. >> This feels the least symmetrical of what you've shown me so far. >> Yeah, it's Well, it does have some symmetry, actually. I mean, it's sort of interesting that in Johnson's work, there was no requirement for any overall symmetry at all. Right. That that was just out the window. But actually all of the Johnson solids it turns out do have some symmetry including this one. Um it's got it's got three three-way uh three-way rotational symmetry and um some reflection symmetry and it's got yeah much less than lots of the other shapes but it still has it has some I think it's very very beautiful shape I should say. So Norman Johnson came up with his list in 1966 but he wasn't able to prove that that list was definitely complete. So that happened later in 1969 Victor Zagal and provided a proof. So, it's basically a proof that Johnson was right. There are exactly 92 of these of these shapes. Good. Okay. So, I want to get on to toids, which is the shape we find in in Bonnie Stewart's book. So, let's have a an example of one here. Whoa. The thing that stands out here, right, is that it's got a hole in it. Obviously, because it's got a hole in it, this shape violates that property of convexity we saw earlier. So if Bonnie Stewart wanted to study shapes like this um he needed if he's going to be really rigorous and geometrical about it needs to come up with an appropriate um softening of convexity which allows things like this. Um and the notion he came up with is called quasi convexity. Um so I'll just uh explain what that is. So if you imagine we take the shape and suppose we want to fill in the hole right so we get some clay or something and we just fill in all the all the holes and gaps until we have a convex shape. The um the shape we would get back would be this one the truncated cube from earlier. When we do that the thing to notice is that the you can see all the edges of that truncated cube already in here in this original shape. Right? to that sort of filling up process. The technical term is finding the convex hull of the shape. What that means is it's the smallest convex shape which contains the original shape. Um and the the thing here is that all the edges of the convex hull are already present as edges in the original shape. Whereas if we take some sort of more spiky thing like this and imagine taking its convex hole, so sort of filling in all the all the all the valleys here with clay until we get something. You can see we're going to get some new edges, right? They're going to be edges which join the two peaks. In fact, what you get out of this one, as it turns out, is a is an icosahedron. The point is you're getting new edges. That's the notion of quasi convexity, which is that when you fill in all the gaps and holes, that doesn't create any new edges. And so that was what Bonnie Stewart set out to study to study toids, which are shapes with holes, but which nevertheless satisfy um that. So, >> do toids have to have a hole? Like is a cube a tooid? Uh I think I think a torid has to have a hole. Yeah. So >> a hole or or just does it have to have concavess? >> Yeah. Um >> does it does it have to be pierce? >> Okay. So we so the uh Yeah. Okay. That's a great that's a great question. It's a great question. So here's um uh he had one more criteria. Okay. So the four criteria are one all the faces are regular polygons. Two this quasi convexity so you don't get any new edges when you fill in all the holes and gaps. And there's another one which is called being a planer. So what that is is if you imagine you just take two cubes and shove them together, just stick them two faces together and I say, "Look, I've discovered a new shape. All its faces are squares, right?" And you think actually that sort of feels like a cheat, right? And the cheat is that we uh we don't want edges where the two faces lie flat to each other, right? So whenever there's an edge, there should be some three-dimensionality to it. >> Like an angle greater than zero. Yeah, basically an angle greater than zero. You just don't want allow neighboring faces to lie flat. So, so being a planer is another criterion. Okay. And then the final one is um this notion of being tunnled. I'm not going to give the formal definition Stuart's definition of being tunnneled, but the point is to avoid sort of like holes which are just a sort of pinhole or something or like a sort of a slit or something. We just want nice clear um definite uh tunnels going through the shape. So those are his four criteria. quasi convexity regular faces a planer and being tunnneled being tunnneled leads on to this idea of the genus of the shape. So the uh a ball or cube has got genus zero it's got no holes and then think of a a taurus donut that's got genus one and then you can have a double taurus with genus two. Then we could ask you know what are the genuses the the gener I think is the term of these shapes. So this one's got genus one. He invented some uh some really beautiful shapes. That's in this one. So, >> whoa. >> What we got here is a rotunda drilled truncated icosid docahedron. So, I think we've seen all the ingredients of this. The sort of external shape that we started with is the truncated icosi docahedron, one of the archimedian solids. And then what he's done is he's taken each of its decagonal faces and drilled it out with the ratunda which was half of the icicosid docahedron. So you've got this great shape. Would you like a tour inside? >> Yeah. Go on. >> Okay. So we can if we go inside and then look around. So these pentagons that's the sort of windows to the outside world. But otherwise you can see uh the internal polyhedrron which is the rhombicosi doahedron which we saw earlier. >> Wow. >> So Stuart in discovered quite a lot of um shapes like this. His record was this one here in terms of record in terms of the genus. So trying to make a um a shape which satisfies all those criteria of the highest possible genus which is technical way of saying with the most possible holes. And this is the the one he came up with. It's got genus 46. And he called this the holy monster. Holy with an E. It's got 934 faces. >> A 934faced monster is also a good name. >> 934faced monster. Yes. But it's not the record holder anymore. So um this was this was as far as Bonnie Stewart got. Uh but Robert Webb over in Australia who also by the way is the uh person who created this software called Stellar which we've been using which I really love for looking at polyhedra like this. Um he uh he made a discovery which is the web tooid. You can see it's a bigger object. Actually this this has genus 41. So this does not beat the holy monster. But what what he realized is that actually it's big enough that you can fit the holy monster inside it and then join the two with a little a little extra piece. And if you do that, you get this shape here, which is um this is the the record holder for um a Stewart toid or toid in the spirit of Bonnie Stewart of maximum genus that we know of so far. And this has genus 87. >> And how many faces? and 2,298 faces. >> Yeah. >> Wow. Pretty impressive. Uh, is there a reason to think that there's a limit to how many holes we can put in these monsters? >> So, it's conjectured in this area that actually the the number of polyhedra which satisfy these crater is actually finite. There's actually a finite finite limit. Um having said which um it's enormously large like sexilians or something. Um so I mean if you just if we go back to the um truncated icosahedron so this is the most complicated of the Archimedian solids and if you imagine sort of drilling your way through you can start to imagine you just pick two faces and you drill through one and come out of another. You start to imagine that's actually a very a lot of choices as to different sort of routes you could take inside different ways you could direct the tunnel >> as long as the hole you make in the face keeps your regular polygon. >> Yeah. Exactly. >> Exactly. So you can we're using sort of some poly we're using some polyhedra to excavate others. Um but um yeah I mean you just take two squares and you could sort of um you know you could you could have some tunnel which goes uh wiggling around inside or you can have two tunnels which sort of go through each other and there's a huge amount of uh of possibilities just with this one the one shape. It is believed that the total number of um stewart toroids which satisfy these conditions is is finite though but I think it's going to be sometime before uh we have a complete list. If you'd like to read some mathematics books written by Dr. Elwis himself, check out the links down below. And also below, I'll include a link to our Patreon page. Thanks to our Patreon supporters for helping make these videos possible. You see some of their names on the screen at the moment. Patreon supporters get access to extra footage, bonus stuff, and little treats that no one else gets to see. If you'd like to join them, as I said, links down below. And even if you're not a Patreon supporter, a huge thanks for watching our videos. >> Can you come back to where you started? Nobody had known the answer to that. People had been thinking about that particular problem for at least a hundred
