# The iPhone of Slide Rules - Numberphile

Источник: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xRpR1rmPbJE
Канал: Numberphile

I want to talk about slide rules. This is a slide rule, but to explain what it is. So, what we have classic old school FaberCastell slide rule. Anyone who is over 50 or maybe over 60 would have had to learn to use one of these at school. And actually, the use of mathematics for the previous 300 odd years required the use of this. And you could say that every single scientific invention or you know through the age of enlightenment through you know the 19th century the 20th century would have relied at some level on ease of calculation through using the slide rule and these are only a few out of the wide variety of problems that can be worked with the standard slide rule. This is what scientists had. So, it was shorthand for being a scientist. And it's so like wonderfully nerdy that I think the nerds were like, "Yeah, this is this is our this is our sword, you know, our lightsaber." Okay. It's actually rather lovely. The way this moves in and out, it's so beautifully done, this instrument. It's actually really pleasurable just just going like this. Thing with a slide rule, it's not like a calculator. It's not digital. You don't get the exact answer. you get an approximate answer, but normally within two to three significant figures, which should usually be enough for the job that you're trying to do. We have one of these scales on the top line here, A, which is the top line. We have another identical scale underneath it on B. So, there are lots of different types of scale here, but I'm just using A and B. A is this one here, and B is underneath it. Let's say we want to multiply 3 * 4 3 * 4. We look at the A and we go to where three is and we put the bottom one at one where three is. Then we go up four and then we read where four is on the original one. And you can see four is at 12 because it's 10 11 12. Just say we do something else. Let's say let's do something more complicated. Seven. Seven is a complicated number. Let's multiply seven by seven. 7 squared. So we put the number one at seven here, one at seven. Then we go up to seven at the bottom one and it exactly comes up at 49. So that's cool. What logarithms do and what this is a physical interpretation of is that they change multiplication into addition. So we're multiplying two things, but actually we're just adding two lengths. The reason why this is useful, obviously 7* 7, we know that in our heads. Just say we wanted to multiply say 2 345 times 64 57. Okay. What we do? We turn that into 2.345 * 6.457. And let's do the sums. So we'll go to 2.345. 345 is probably about there. And we go up to here. 6.457. 6.457. 457 and that is that's almost exactly 15. Okay. So get rid of our things. So three that would tell me lit within a few seconds that 2345 * 6457 is 15 million. And why don't we just check that 457 equals Wow. The real answer 15 million41 665. This gives us a handy idea of what the answer is going to be. Multiplication is addition. So division is subtraction. So let's say we want to divide 20 by three. We go to 20 and we just basically need to take away three. So we put three where oops where the 20 is there and go down to one and where is one we use our hairline here. Oh look it's six between 6.6 and 6.7. This is something which is kind of quite cool and fun and a bit of a historical relic but it's not particularly beautiful thing unlike my other slide rule my prized possession. And this is the Holden Calcullex. Okay, I'm going to open it. It's from 1906. And it comes almost like, you know, like like I'm proposing marriage to you that I'm getting down on my bended knee and giving you all calcullex. Will you be my mathematical bride? So, what this is is it is a circular slide rule. So, here we have the logarithmic scale along a line. in a circular slide rule. It's in a circle. Now, just put that down for a second. This comes with this fantastic sort of set of instructions. The thing is, not that many people collect mathematical instruments and so you probably get loads of, you know, this might have been found by someone just clearing out their attic. Didn't know what it was. And it can't have been more than a few dozen dollars. So revised rules, tables and formula for the Horden calculates which is a circular slide rule. Now this is just wonderful. Absolutely wonderful. Price 1 over6. That's a penny. Is it? I don't know. I'm I'm I'm too young even though I'm old to understand old English things. I'm going to read you a story. Although the ordinary slide rule is usually acknowledged to be a most useful and reliable instrument, it has one or two great disadvantages. For instance, it is a most inconvenient article to carry about in one's pocket. Also, in the hands of the average user, it is rendered almost useless for any unusual calculation. So in other words, you would couldn't put this in a pocket and it's not very elegant. On the other hand, the Holden calculates is beautiful. It's like a a pocket watch and it's something that if you ever needed to do fast approximate analog calculations on the fly and it was 1906, you could whisk this out here. There are two moving parts. There is you're you're moving this logarithmic scale against the top one. So two sides and you've got the the hairline here. You can move the middle one and you've got the hairline. So again, there are lots of different scales for doing lots of different things. I'm just going to concentrate on multiplication and division. So just say again we wanted to say do four * five and we can see if you can see it close up we know it's 20 and it's on 20. This is lovely this thing. What what do you do with this? What do you do? You do calculations. You can do what do you do with it? What do I do it? I sort of take it out and stroke it and polish it and and put it up there and you know talk to it. Quite a lot of times things are just made for being functional and this is something which is not only is it functional it is a rather beautiful object and it's you could say it's a kind of iPhone of the um you know early English 20th century because this is the height of technology packaged with beauty. Thanks to audible.com for supporting this video. Audible has more than 180,000 downloadable titles across all types of literature, including fiction, non-fiction, and periodicals. I'm an Audible user and particularly enjoy listening to books when I'm walking the dogs or driving the car or slogging along on the treadmill. They really make the time pass so much more quickly. Now, among Audible's huge collection is a book by Alex Bellowos, the person you just watched talking about slide rules. Here's Alex's Adventures in Numberland. super easy to find and download onto your Audible app. Why not check that one out? To find out more about how to do it, go to audible.com/numberfile. There you can sign on for a 30-day free trial, including your first book, and see what you think. That's 30 days free trial. It's a great service, easy to use, and our thanks to Audible for supporting the
