# The World's LONGEST Klein Bottle - Numberphile

Источник: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=v7yKZzbyF74
Канал: Numberphile

As far as I know, this is the world's second biggest glass bottle. But with the help of my friend Lucas Clark, we're going to try to turn this into maybe not a bigger Klein bottle, but perhaps a longer one. In front of me, Lucas Clark and his hot torch. Grab a goat. Slower down. [Music] Almost. We got We're broken. We're broken. Time to get another climb up. We'll try the same thing except I'll slow down as soon as I start feeling it hard. I'll slow it down. Yeah. Really fast in the beginning and then slow right down. Yeah. Yeah. And get ready to go soon. When you put it in my hand, I'll take it. Ready? And and done. All to work it. Do you want to just put your hand on that? There we go. [Music] Notice how it bends. Bends to a point. We lost another one. Get it hot and then go right down. Oh, hold on. Hold on. Hold on. So, you're going to cut this. Then we can heat around the side. Heat around the side. Once we get it gooey, gooey hot, take off running. See about why don't I keep this here. Ready and go. [Music] Well done. [Music] I almost need a spool. This is like field surgery. I've got this. It's the most elongated Klein bottle in the world. It's zero volume and yet it goes down my driveway and back up. It's not orientable and yet it's oriented down on a piece of brown paper. So these these fine bits here, they're still they're hollow. I didn't think it was going to happen. And then you know we switched up. Went with a steadier runner. Okay. It's one two three four. It's about 5 m down that way and five back. You can see it. There's the There they are. You can see it goes all the way down. Here's where it loops around and heads back on itself. Here does 490 cm. Plus, it came up 5 m there and back. So, it's 10 m total travel. The 10 m client bottle. A 10 m long Klein bottle. Wow. This is like gossamer. This is like the hardest thing to film in the history of filming. Let's get bad lighting. Invisible filaments. I'm sorry. I mean, could a You said that tube was hollow. Presumably, you couldn't get water through that, could you? Or you could. You could. You could. You, but you'd have to be careful about it. Yeah. If you heat it up and drive out all those gases, as it cools down, it'll shrink and contract and pull the water up into it. Hey, Pat. Maybe he just wants to show his wife. I would. Come on. Bobby, it's so cool. Worth mentioning is this tube not only could perhaps conduct water, but it certainly conducts light. It's a fiber optic. And the physics and math of fiber optics is fascinating. You get light bouncing back and forth and back and forth. And the fiber optic internally is not just not just glass, but it's radiated glass. The index of refraction changes from the outside to the inside. Fiber optics are solid usually. This one is hollow as a good Klein bottle ought to be. My wife Pat over here. You got to come and have a look. Pat, I'm taking a look. Did Did Cliff make you come out and look at his new climb bottle? Yeah, I got to see. Check this out. Don't walk on top of it. Notice Notice Pat, there's a the This duck bill over here is the beginning of the top of the Klein bottle. It goes all the way down the driveway to where Lucas is. Comes back around here. Back to here. Okay. This is the longest Klein bottle. Isn't there a movie about the longest day? This is the longest Klein bottle. My god. Lin Klein Flasher. It's the most zero volume of zero volume Klein bounce. I could almost hear Felix Klein turning over in his grave. The poor guy. Is that visible, Brady? Yeah, at times it's Gossamer thread. At time the sunlight at times catches it and yeah, it's all right. Oh, it's a spiderweb. Hold on. You're caught around the [Laughter] camera. I think I might be able to even wear it as a necklace. But this is clearly by any measure the longest glass. And we finally finish it. I say, "This is a glass bottle." So I say, "I'll go over to the math department in Berkeley and I'll show my friend Ken Rivet this this Klein bottle. He's a topologist. He'll actually appreciate it." Heading over to where I store bottles under my house.
