# The Millionaire Machine - Numberphile

Источник: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wwh0KH-ICCw
Канал: Numberphile

Come on in there. Go back 100. No, no, no, no. 120 years. 120 years ago. You want to do adding and subtracting? Well, you'll do long adding and subtracting. If you were really clever and you're really rich, you would have a French arithometer. But if you really wanted to do a lot of arithmetic, you're kind of stuck. Hans Igley 1894 1895 in Switzerland came up with an absolutely wonderful device a calculator called the millionaire. It'll not only add, it'll multiply, it'll divide, it'll even subtract. So it's a four function calculator. It has handles on either side. I can lift this up just and it only weighs 60 or 70 pounds. A portable calculator smaller than a piano. You can't get cooler than that. Let's try to just add three. Crank this around once. Three once. This three again. 3 + 3 is six. again 9 and then 12 15 18 21 Okay, so every time I want to add a number, I crank this around once. I crank it around once. Every time I want to add Let's try something slightly more complex. Let's set this to 14 million 531. So this is 14,637,531. Okay, I'll add this once. Okay, the answer is 14,637531. Again, this number plus itself 29,275 again. So each time I add this, I've now multiplied this by three. 14,637531 * 3 is 43,912,593. Not bad. It adds and by successive addition I can just crank around, add one more time, add again and go, oh yeah, yeah, big deal. The cool thing, the absolute wonderful thing about the millionaire machine is it has one crank multiplication. I can multiply a big number by a single digit in one turn. Let's do a reset. I'll set to multiply. So, I'll multiply this big number instead of by one, I'll multiply it by seven. Seven times this number will wind up down here. Crank it around one time. One single crank. This big number 14,637,000 times 7 is 102,462,717. But watch this. Instead of multiplying by seven, let's multiply by 74. One turn. One turn. Now let's multip. Let's make this this big number times 749. We should pick up a nine over here. One turn. 14 million blah blah blah* 749 is 10 bill963 million 510,719. So we're already into the billions. And let's multiply once more by six. Single turn 14,637,531 times 7,496 is 19 billion722,932,376. All that multiplying required just four turns of this because this millionaire has built into it a readonly memory that knows the multiply tables. It knows that 7* 2 is 14. This thing knows that 1* 7 is 7. It knows that 8 * 4 is uh 32. Brady, can I take him upstairs? Brady says it's okay for me to show you the readonly memory. Come over here. Come here. Come here. Come here. Come here. Come here. Okay, guys. I actually have two of these. This one I'm repairing. Boy, there's a lot to fix inside of it. This is the multiply unit. Come on out. All mil by hand out of brass. belong here is the readonly memory is the multiply table put in brass. It'll multiply any one digit. Essentially, it knows that 0 time anything is zero. It knows that one time anything is itself all the way up to nine. It knows its tables from 0 to nine. It knows the nine's table. Here's the zero table. One, two, three, four, five, all the way up to nine. So maybe I can show this by bringing this over here and turning this. You'll see these levers engage with the table right now. If I want to multiply by zero, you'll notice nothing engages with this. Multiplying by one or multiply by two. Let's multiply by nine. Crank this all the way over here. And the bottom row of fingers will push along here and register nine times each of these digits to bring them down into the results table. Absolutely amazing. I'm blown away. In Switzerland 120 years ago, people had the smarts to figure out how to build the predecessor to today's computers. I got two of them about 35 years ago, 38 years ago in Buffalo, New York. A bank was closing up. I was at the auction. I paid a good penny for this. It was considered to be worth its weight in brass. Yep. I paid $75 for it, which was about how much the brass was worth. I made it even more portable by mounting it on wheels so that I can I can close it up and take it wherever I wish. Next time I need to multiply, add, subtract, or divide, I know just how to go to What it now the cost of it is the chiropractic bills of carrying it. Whatever it's worth on eBay would be subtracted by the shipping costs of something that weighs 50, 75, 100 pounds.
