# The Brain of John Conway (and his Amazing Tongue) - Numberphile

Источник: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=y5ARAxW2k_4
Канал: Numberphile

I think anyone who watches Number Files really likely to be familiar with the name John Conway. He's a really famous mathematician, a really interesting character, and we've even featured him a couple of times here on the channel. I'm not going to worry anymore ever again. But here's some interesting news. There's a new biography of Conway out. It's called Genius at Play by Siobhan Roberts. I'll tell you a bit more about the book later. But first of all, I want to show you a video because Siobhan and some people she's been working with while writing the book made a short little kind of film or mini documentary with John Conway and they've decided to give it its first viewing here on Number File. So, I'm going to play that film and then I'll talk to you again afterwards. Very nice. [Music] Yeah, I don't actually want to get rid of my brain immediately, but I don't care, you know, after I'm dead. I really don't. And um but I don't like thinking about that momento mari reminder of death. You're doing very well. All those pictures are looking great. We're just going to do sort of calibration type scans before we start the next part. You know, like all young people, I was immortal at once. And like all people of my present age, um I noticed growing old and when I had a stroke 5 years ago, I really noticed it was an abrupt discontinuity in my life. So this is a whole brain. You could you could see that there are two halves, two hemispheres. So you can see there's the left and the right hemisphere. So the region that we're particularly interested in in uh John is the region somewhere over here, the parietal lobe. Cuz as you know um different parts of the brain are very involved in different functions. And of course, that's one of the things why we think it's so fabulous that we're going to be able to do functional magnetic resonance imaging with you because we want to see which part of your brain uh is particularly active when you're thinking some of your great mathematical thoughts. I have this visual field problem. I wasn't aware that I was being shown to the first few seconds. I only saw that I Okay, that's no problem. We might uh we might answering sort of essentially stupid questions. Well, not stupid, but I mean, is this object here a rotation of this object and some funny geometrical shape? Well, I couldn't care less whether it is or not, you know, but I was trying to uh answer the question. I suppose the the thing that made my name as a mathematician was the discovery of this amazing uh geometrical group in 24 dimensions and I distinctly remember at one time sort of sitting in an armchair or lying down on the floor I can't remember which exactly was and sort of waving my arms and legs in the air because I needed to be able to point in more directions than there are in threedimensional space, you know, and that had more effect than the discovery of the surreal numbers. Namely, um it affected my career. I went from being an unknown to being at the center of the stage for mathematicians, the world stage in a certain sense. There's a magazine you may have heard of called Weer's Digest. And in one of these ones, it said, "Are you a tongue gymnast?" I was a student in Cambridge at the time. And then they gave four exercises. And it said, "So far nobody has been found who can do all four." And this sounded like a challenge to me. Let me do thick and thin. The clover leaf almost unbelievable. The waves rather than uh just staying at the age of 25, which I did for 25 years at least. Um I'm aware now that there's only finitely much to go. Um, and it's a very very different and rather frightening feeling, you know. So, this date, the 20th of December, approached me, you know, at the 1st of December, it was about 3 weeks away, and it just inexurably approached me and grew more and more frightening, looming, you know, and now it's almost behind me. [Music] If you'd like to see even more with John Conway, of course, we've got the videos that we've made here on Number File. But to really get under his skin, we're going to recommend this Genius at Play, Siobhan Roberts. There'll be links under the video. I haven't read it all yet. I've only just got it, but I have been going through it and I'm really impressed. It's really interesting, but also really accessible and fun. I think everyone from a mathematician through to the layman like me will quite enjoy this one. So, have a look if you like, and thanks for watching today. Links below in the video description. Genius apply.
