# The Secret of the Raffle Function (epic proof) - Numberphile

Источник: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XhA5U9pFXuU
Канал: Numberphile

It is about an interesting function called the raffle function. But that's not a formal name, not just a placeholder. In the end, we will discover that we probably have seen this function in other places. But in order to answer this question, just like mathematicians always do, most of the time do they build a whole world around it. they solve a larger problem and they use their insight to go back and solve the original problem. Okay? So imagine you're participating in a raffle infinite one. So there are infinitely many tickets and on each ticket there is a natural number. What's a natural number? A positive integer 1 2 3 4 and so each of those tickets has one such number written on it. But there is a rule for any number, let's say 10, the number of divisors of 10. If I put all of their tickets together and count them, that will be exactly 10. I take six, the divisor of six, put all of their tickets together, count them is going to be six. So let me demonstrate. So what are the divisors of six? They are one, two, three and six itself. And so let's say just hypothetically the number one is written on two tickets. All right. >> It's written on two tickets. >> On two let's say I don't know. I'm just like hypothesizing. The number two may be written on three tickets. The number three may be written on one and the number six. Well, there is nothing left for it because take a look. 2 + 3 + 1 is already six. But maybe 1 is written only on one. 2 is written on two. Three is written on two. And maybe six then will have a one. I just don't know ahead of time. But if I add up all of those tickets on which the numbers 1 2 3 and six are written, I'm going to get exactly six tickets. And on no other tickets those numbers are written. It's a very complicated rule. Let's take another number for instance four. Four is slightly simpler or so it looks. The divisor are 1, two and four. Right? Okay. So those three numbers written on some tickets. If I put them together, I should get a total of four tickets. So for instance one could be written on one true on one and then for four I have to have two right >> I think I understand now. All right. >> Yeah. Yeah. So for every number when I say number I mean natural number if I add up all of those tickets on which its devices are written I exactly have to equal to that number. Okay Brady. So let's say you go into this raffle and you have a favorite number. Give me your favorite two-digit number. >> I like the number 42. >> Okay. For an obvious reason. 42. You are asking would there be a ticket on which the number 42 is written? How many? Right. So that's that that's what we want to find out. >> Does every number have to be represented in the in the bucket of tickets or can some numbers not have a ticket? >> That is exactly my question. >> Oh, okay. You >> okay? Right. >> You give me a number. Would that number be there? Okay. >> And uh how many of those numbers how many tickets would have that number there? So 42 for example as I said is 2 * 3 * 7. Right? How many divisor does 42 have? And this brings me to a relative >> are you not counting one and 42? >> Oh I am counting all. You just all I did here is I split 42 into it so-called prime power factorization. >> So it is 2 to the 1st * 3 to the 1st* 7 to the 1st. Okay, there will be exactly eight divisor 1 2 3 7 those will be the prime divisor. But then I can start multiplying them. 6 21 14 and finally 42 itself eight divisor. If I add up the tickets on which all of these eight numbers are written, I'm going to get exactly 42 tickets. But I don't know if 42 is actually written anywhere. Doesn't have to be. So we root for Brady. We want 42 to be written somewhere. Okay. So let us start now with this big construction process where we will construct a new world around the situation. So for starters we need a placeholder an anchor rather for our unknown raffle function. So we're going to call it r for raffle. And if I put a number n there, that would mean the number of tickets with that n written on them. For instance, we are looking for Brady's R of 42. We want to know on how many tickets 42 is written. Could be zero >> because of course 42 is a divisor of other numbers as well. >> Yeah. And so it's a very intricate rule here. And is it actually possible even for it to happen or is this kind of a fake rule that just wishful thinking? Okay, so with this in mind, if you don't know any theory, you will start from simple numbers and figure out what's going on. So what's the simplest number here? >> One. >> One. That's right. So is one written on anything? Well, one is the only divisor of itself. So by this rule, one better be written on one ticket. So that's it. One is written on one ticket. And we have found our first value of our function. Keep on going. Now two, two has divisor one and two. So r of one, the number of tickets for one plus r of two. This better be two. But one is already written on one ticket. So what's left for two? One. >> So both one and two are written on exactly one ticket. >> And no more. They're done. >> No more. No, that's it. And now we can use this in order to try to figure out what's happening for the other numbers. >> Three, on the other hand, let's see. Since it's a prime number, it has only these two divisors. And so when I do its condition adding up the number of tickets and I get three. If this guy is one, oh I'm going to have two tickets on which three is written >> because Oh yeah. Okay. Because there are two devices. >> That's right. That's right. So if you want to draw a picture of this, one is written on one ticket, two is written on one ticket, but three is written on two tickets. Aha. Now how about four? We will still go just for a little bit to explore. Well, we actually have for four the numbers. There they are. One to four. Now one was written on one ticket. Two on one. How much is left for four? Have to add up to four. So four will also be written on two tickets. >> Oh, it has Yeah, that's right. It has to add up to the number, not the number of divisor. >> No, no, no. So four is also written on two tickets. We're kind of thinking this is messy. Let us see if we can figure out five without much hassle. One would be written on one ticket. But overall I need five. So what's left for five? Four tickets. Five is very prestigious. Is that how you say it? >> That's a word. >> Yeah. Yeah. Prodigious. Yeah. It has lots of tickets on it. Here we start thinking hold on what's going to happen for seven. The prime numbers have only themselves and one is a divisor. But since one is already written on one tickets, what's left for them? Themselves minus one. We have a formula. So something's cooking here. The raffle of a prime number P better be P minus one. Mhm. Yes. So now unfortunately for Brady's number 42 it's not prime so I cannot yet determine what's happening but four wasn't prime either and we managed to do it. Are we ready now to find where six how many tickets six will be written? Absolutely. We even have the demonstration pieces here. One is written on one two on one. Three on two 1 + 2 1 + 1 + 2 that's four. There are two left for six to add up overall to six. So r of six is two. We know that r of seven hold on is six. One less than seven cuz that was prime. How about eight? Eight. It is it is complicated. Uh it has a lot of powers of two, right? But that's all actually not so complicated. One was written on one. Two on one that's four. Four was written on two tickets. We are keeping tab on these. And so how much is left for eight? 1 + 1 + 2 that's four. for eight overall I need a four. >> It's kind of confusing that you used the prime devices there and not just the divisor but >> no no no no actually there is a reason for that. Okay. And you can see that uh the number of tickets on which each of those is written is going down by a power of two. Mhm. So it looks like r of 8 is 2^ squar which is 4. Okay. This is a lot of data. Maybe we start seeing patterns, maybe we don't. But if we soon don't see something, this is going to get overwhelming and we may drop it. No, we're not going to drop it. So, let's have another piece of paper. Okay. We need a brilliant idea, an epiphany. And I'm going to go back to the number six because for six we found the number of tickets on which it was written was two. That's what was left over from the other numbers. Now what was R of 2 and R of 3 because 6 is equal to 2 * 3. I somehow want to relate the bigger output here to the smaller ones from before. Well, because two and three are prime, I'm just going to go one lower. And if I multiply them, I'm getting two. So, I am seeing a larger thing that might be happening on a larger scale. Aha. The function split along multiplication, right? That's interesting. That's interesting. Let's test this theory on 10. The number 10. Why on the number 10? Because 10 is like six. Even though it may not not look like it, 10 is a product of two different primes. Okay. Is that going to be equal to the product of the function on those two primes? Let's see. Well, r of two is one. One less than two. R of five is four. So overall, this is four. Is R of 10 written on exactly four tickets? Well, that's easy to figure out because the divisor of 10 are one, two, five, and 10 itself. One is written on one, two is written on one ticket. Five, five is written on four. And what is 10 going to be written? Remember that this whole thing has to add up to 10. Six on four tickets. Hey. Hey, that's our four. H >> looks like we have come up up upon another rule which we are not yet seeing how why it works. But if I have two different prime numbers P and Q, then the function breaks into a product of the corresponding values. Now how would you prove that? Like you're asking a middle schooler, right? Well, maybe the middle schooler is going to run through exactly this same argument but with letters and will succeed because the divisors of this number are 1 P Q and PQ. Right? So, you're going to say this is on one ticket. This is on P minus one. Q minus one. How much is left for the whole thing to equal to PQ? Right. Okay. Well, the ones are going to cancel those two and then these I can put to the other side. So, the question mark becomes PQ minus P minus Q plus this one. You look at this like does this factor? This has to factor. What is the factor? Well, P Q -1 -1 multiply through. This is working. This is factoring. And P minus one was R of P and Q - one was R of This is working. We proved this formula. I am seeing something, but I'm not quite there yet. How about powers of a particular prime? Cuz here we had different primes coexisting. But what if I keep on feeding the same prime over and over again? We actually already saw a pattern of this with the twos, didn't we? So for two, we got one ticket. For four, we got two. For eight, we got four. I mean, the pattern is kind of obvious. So what's happening? Let us do a crazy example, a general one. R of P to the five. Okay. So what is this going to be equal to? Um p to the 5 has what? Divisor one p the powers of p right p 2 p cubed p to the 4th and p to the 5th. All of this has to add up to p to the 5th. Okay. So one goes on one ticket. P already we know is a prime to p minus one. Then I'm going to ask you what does P squared go into? Up to here I have to add up to P^ squ. Okay. Well, the ones are going to cancel if I add. So what should I add to P to get to P^ 2? P ^2 minus P. All right. Now if I add up all of those, I have to get to P cubed. Well, the P's here conveniently cancel. So what should I add to P^2 to get to P cub? Pubus P^2. Aha. And if I go up to here to P to the 4th, those will cancel. If I add up, I'm going to get these many tickets. And so so on and so forth. We see P to the 5th minus P to the 4th. So it's the number minus the previous power. So we are now conjecturing with this argument. And if someone wants to prove it, you can do it by induction on the power that the raffle at P to the n is p to the n minus the previous power. This is as far as I'm going to go with messing with examples and looking for patterns. I promise the bigger picture, but I lied. I haven't yet given it to you. I have to give you a definition of a type of functions that I expect this raffle function will turn into. So for that I need a different sheet of paper. [Music] So for brace number 42 which was a product of three distinct primes the situation is going to get complicated. Now I can brute force it and show what's going to happen. But we want to solve this problem for all numbers and therefore we will introduce definition of a new type of functions. So f will be our function. First of all I'm going to define what I'm going to call arithmetic functions. So it goes uh let's just be simple here. Let's start from the natural numbers and go to the real numbers but you can put complex numbers here. You can put whatever numbers. So we are going to call these functions for which the inputs are natural numbers and the outputs are whatever just simply arithmetic functions and we will denote the set of arithmetic functions by a. Our raffle function is an arithmetic function because in it we keep inputting natural numbers. So it is of this type. It's a very general type. Now a more special type would be the set of so-called multiplicative functions. So if in addition to being arithmetic f satisfies the following property f of a * b is equal to f of a * f of b but I'm not yet done for all a and b co-prime. What does it mean co-prime? Relatively prime they don't share any divisor other than one. So for any such co-prime or relatively prime numbers this has to happen. >> So they do share no >> they share just one >> just one okay and so um we will call those functions multiplicative because they split these products into some other products. They work well with multiplication. >> Can you give me example of two co-prime numbers just so I've got it in my head? >> Oh absolutely. Um, let's say six. The other number shouldn't be even and it should not be divisible by three. So, how about 25? There you go. Those two numbers don't share a common device rather than one. So, they are co-prime. And if f were multiplicative, then f has to split. What is this? 150. Okay, f of 150 should be f of 6 * f of 25 and it must work on this splitting principle as soon as you feed into it two prime uh not two prime but two co-prime numbers. >> Okay, >> so our raffle function exhibits the signs of being multiplicative. For instance, for um two distinct prime numbers P and Q, it has to do this. And it does it because what was the raffle of a prime number? It was P minus one, right? The raffle for the Q would be Q minus one, right? But when you multiply them on the previous sheet, we show that this is indeed the raffle of PQ. So our raffle function looks like it should be multiplicative. Now I have to point out this condition here being co-prime is super important because if the two numbers are not relatively prime, this doesn't have to hold. And our raffle function is doing exactly that. is defying this rule for let's say the number four because the number four is equal to 2 * 2. But is that equal to the raffle of two times the raffle of two? No. Raffle of two is one. So on the right hand side I just have one. But raffle of four wasn't one. It was two. So if they are not co-prime, don't even dare plug them into this formula. There are no guarantees that this formula would work. In fact, if it did work for any two natural numbers, there's going to be a special multiplicative function which only I probably in this world call strongly multiplicative. And that would be yet a third set here of strongly multiplicative functions. So functions for which this rule f of a b is f of a * f of b works for all the symbol for all natural numbers a and b. Okay. So let's step back and think about it. Our raffle function where do we expect it to be? By the way, this is like AMS, American Mass Society, just just for a you know funneic device. The raffle function is obviously not strongly multiplicative because it already defies the rule for four here, but we hope very much hope that it will be multiplicative. So, I'm going to put it right here with a question mark. >> Haven't you already shown me here that it's strongly multiplicative? What? What have you not shown me? >> Ah, how about this? So numbers don't have to be just products of P and Q or maybe they could be product of three distinct prime numbers like 42. We haven't shown that this is working right for any prime power decomposition just for some simple ones. Okay, now that we have this picture am let's start putting familiar functions around. Let us get the feel of of this multiplicative world. What function is also multiplicative that or maybe I will need another sheet of paper just for those functions. Yeah, >> more functions more Greek letters. How? How of n will simply be the number of divisor of n? That's an arithmetic functions because all I'm plugging into it are just natural numbers and spitting out the number of divisor of n. Sigma of n. How about the sum of divisor of n? So um these two functions turn out to be multiplicative and you can try at home to prove it. Actually, it is more of a combinatorial problem here than number theory. They are multiplicative and I'll give you just a couple of examples. So, these are multiplicative functions. For instance, >> they're not just arithmetic. They're they're >> exactly they in the they let's second ring of the onion. >> Yeah. Right here. So, um Oops. For instance, I mentioned this before. What is toao of 42? How many divis does 42 have? Well, you split 42 into 2 * 3 * 7. And um well, since I told you it's multiplicative, but you you have to check this. It will split along this product since all of those numbers here are co-prime to each other. And how many divisor does a prime number have? Well, two. So each of those guys will be two two. So you're going to get our eight from earlier discussion. So this towel is indeed multiplicative. I'm not proving it. That's your homework. So in fact a famous formula for toao and which is very useful in practice is the following. Split n into its prime powers like that. So these are distinct primes raised to some power. Okay. And then using the splitting principle for multiplicative functions, you will split it along those prime powers because they share not nothing in common. No divisor. But you can directly count how many divisor does a prime power have. Well, you start from one and you'll build up to the full prime power. How many is that? Don't be fooled. It's not a1, it's a1 + one. Don't to forget, not to forget the one. So the whole practical formula that I was talking about is simply add one to all of those exponents and multiply. In fact, that's exactly what we did to 42 because the exponents were ones. We just added one to them. We got 222 and that's your eight. Sigma is also multiplicative. So, if I attempt to find the sum of the divisor of 42, instead of doing this crazy thing of listing them and adding them up, I'm just going to split it into much simpler, smaller problems like that and then do it uh separately. Well, every prime number has only two divisor, one plus itself. So, I'm just going to do that. Adding up the divisor, you're going to get what? 3 * 4 * 8 and feel free to finish off the computation. So both of those are just some everyday functions that you will find out they're multiplicative but none of them are strongly multiplicative. Well, how do you prove that? I just need one counter example. Where is the first counter example? We can look two small numbers that are not relatively prime. What are those two first small numbers? the chair something other than one. Two and two. >> It's the same number. Oh, >> same number. Yeah. Yeah. Four. If I multiply them, I get four. So, if I attempt to find toao of four as we see um is this going to be equal to to of 2 * of 2? Let's see how many divisor does two have? Well, one in itself. This one. one and itself. But how many divisor does four have? Is it four? No. Four has one, two, four. It has three divisor. Bingo. Tao is not strongly multiplicative. Mhm. And you can check for sigma. Sigma of four is 1 + 2 + 4. I added all divisor. That's seven. And that spells travel because seven is definitely not sigma of two sigma of two. In other words, add up the divisor of two. That's three. That's three. Did I do this right? Oops. 3 squared. 9. Those two are not equal. So in our picture, this AMS picture definitely those two are not going to go inside. And the raffle is also doing the same thing on four. So if you want to show that something not strongly multiplicative, check first what it is doing at four. And most likely it's not going to do that. But no guarantees. I do want to know at least a couple of strongly multiplicative functions. And the simplest ones that you can ever think in terms of functions are the constant functions. So are all constant functions multiplicative or strongly multiplicative? What is going on? It turns out that there are only two constant functions that are multiplicative and happen to be also strongly multiplicative. Very simple functions. the zero function and the one function which we're going to give another name iota that's not like I those two functions you can easily check they're multiplicative and strongly multiplicative whatever you feed into them they're always going to give you zero or one but no other constant function even dares to be multiplicative let's take for example the constant function five g of n is going to be always five okay so let Let us try. Is this multiplicative? Well, g of 6 will is supposed to then equal to g of 2 * g of 3. But how can this be possible? Every time I plug in something into my function, I output five. So 5 is not equal to 5 * 5. So any number other than zero and one is not going to work. Those constant other functions better be outside here. But 0 and one are always going to work because 0 is equal to 0 * 0 and 1 is equal to 1 * 1. You can see very easily there is no other one. So okay this is good. Uh what else do we want? We want uh an operation on those functions. So we are getting higher in the in the structural level. So far, we were looking at functions separately, but how do they communicate with each other? Let's get another sheet of paper. >> All right. [Music] >> Okay. Operations on functions. So, in I don't know, elementary school, maybe middle school, what did you do to functions? If you ever knew they were functions, you added them, you multiplied them, you subtracted them, right? Um let's talk about multiplication because we're talking about multiplicative functions. What is this operation of multiplication on functions doing? So I'm going to do two tables here. One of them will be our new correct one and the other one is the old not quite useful. So multiplication for the old way of multiplying functions. So if I have a function f and I multiply it by the zero function I mean how do you multiply two functions? So what is f g of n? All you're going to do is just multiply their values right. So if one of the functions is the zero functions definitely going to be zero all the time. So I'm just going to get the zero function here. No wonders. If I multiply by the one function. So this guy will always be one. So I'm going to get back my original function. As I was saying, this is not quite the right operation for us because it is not going to give us our raffle function back. There is one extra player that I want to define another function. That function I'm going to call the epsilon function. And the name is good for a reason coming from another area of mathematics. Let's say calculus. There you talk about these limits and epsilon delta. So epsilon there usually denotes a small positive number. Well, here I can't have 0.3 because that's not a natural number. But what would be the embodiment of this epsilon as a function in our world? It's kind of the smallest thing that's not zero, but it's still there. So what would that be? epsilon of n would be one if n is one and then zero if n is bigger than one. So what does this function do? It goes blip and then it's dead. So that's the closest. So you're thinking eh how useful could this function possibly be? Right? So you've got one here and then it's kind of dead for 2, three, four and so on. Well, guess what? This epsilon function is also multiplicative. As a matter of fact, it's strongly multiplicative. So you can check that the epsilon function I'm pulling my sheet here. This bleep of a function is actually strongly multiplicative. We can check the rule for it. Is this epsilon of a going to be equal to epsilon of a * epsilon of b for any two numbers a and b. Well, there only two options for this epsilon to be one or zero. And it's going to be one only if whatever you feed into it is one. So if any one of those a or b is bigger than one, let's say b is three, both sides are going to immediately die. They're going to be zero because epsilon of something bigger than one is zero and I'm going to get a zero here. So what's left? Both of the numbers must be ones. But then both sides will obviously be equal to one. So there isn't much to check here. Just kind of a logical argument. So what happens if I multiply by epsilon in my usual world of functions? Okay. So what happens? Um f of n times epsilon of n. Well, this is going to die if n is bigger than one cuz epsilon is going to kill it. But if n is one, if n is one, there's going to be one and then I'm going to get f of one. So it's another blip function. At one, you just get f of one and then you're dead. It's not a very interesting situation here. I'm just going to write it like this. Okay. What is the real operation? Not the real but the the new real operation. It's called dearishly product or durishlay convolution. Sounds very intimidating but don't be so intimidating. I'm just going to use a star here to denote it to look different from this dot. Okay. So we will have our usual players. So what is this operation? Here we go. The main definition. If I have two arithmetic functions f and g and I want to dishly product them multiply them. Okay. So what is this equal to? So what I'm going to do is take all of the divisor of n and start feeding them into the functions and adding up the result. So I'm going to have f of g1 times g of the opposite divisor which will be n / d1. That will also be a divisor of n. And then I'm going to keep feeding another divisor into the first function and the opposite divisor into G. Keep on going until I exhaust all of the divisors and that will be a new function that we are calling this dearishly convolution. Okay, let us take an example here. What happens if I do far g of six? Well, I mean what are the divisor of six? I'm going to feed one into F, but then I have to feed its opposite six into G. So those two multiply to six. Then we do f of 2 g of three cuz those multiply to six. And f of 3 g of 2. And finally f of 6 g of 1. Okay, we get the drift. If you want to scare ourselves, we can write a shortcut formula using uh-uh summation, right? So, what are we doing? We are feeding a divisor into F and then we are feeding the opposite divisor into D as long as D is a divisor of N. Or if you want a more kind of symmetric description, feed two divisor of n into f and g d1 and d2 as long as they multiply to n. That's exactly the same definition. All right. So where does this lead us? This looks pretty artificial. Like why did deerish supposedly introduce it? Because it does what we want eventually. Let us see what would happen if I take f* star zero. Well, f star zero the zero function is going to just kill everything. So it is still zero. Same thing as before. But what happens if I start f with the one or iota function? I'm going to get something else. F star the iota function or the one of a. Now remember that this will always give me one. So I can just disregard the second part the g's here. So I will end up simply adding the values of f on all of the divisor of n. Does this sound familiar? Adding up something about divisor of n. that was kind of like the sigma function that we talked about earlier but but in a in in a bigger generality. So this is very important. I am going to write it as f of d as long as d is a divisor of n and I'm going to give it another name. This is the sum function of f and the notation will be s subf. So what we were talking about here is actually a new function. For every function f I create a new sum function. I said that I've seen this before. This reminds me earlier. So let us go back and check if we will recognize things. So we have divisor of n this towel. What would happen if I take the sum function of just the constant one function? What is this? I'm supposed I'm supposed to keep adding what this iota function is going to do to it. But this iota function all it does is it spits out one. So this is just once right. So how many ones did I add? As many divisor as I have. So this is the number of divisor of n. But we have a word for it. It is toao of n. So the sum function of the one function is toao. We are seeing connections. So these two functions from now on are somehow related in the same family. Let me talk about another function or they have a sheet of paper here. Uh identity. What is the identity function? So if you have studied like pre-calculus or maybe even some algebra. Yeah. One of the simplest function is f ofx= to x. So what does it do for any input? It spits out the same thing. So it returns the identity of the input. That is what mathematicians call the identity function. So in this case the identity function is going to take only natural inputs but all it's going to do is going to spit them out as natural numbers. Same same natural number. So where is this identity function in our multiplicative land? Let us see. I think the identity function is going to be strongly multiplicative because identity of AB well that's supposed to be AB. Is that equal to the identity of A times identity of B? Well certainly that's A. That's B. You can't find anything much more strongly multiplicative than the identity function. Okay. What is the sum function of the identity function? What am I supposed to do? I have to take all divisor of n and feed them into the identity function and add up. So identity of d1 plus identity of d2 etc etc for all of those divisors. Yeah. But the identity returns just the divisor. Isn't that the function that we talked about? That's the sum of the divisor sigma. So our character functions are starting to pop up and get connected to each other. So now I need a new sheet of paper so we can draw chains of functions. [Music] So now chains of functions we see that the functions are starting to get related to each other. Uh what have we found? Just to remind you if you have a function and deishlate with this one constant function you're going to get what we call the sum function of f. And what did we find that if I take the zero function and take its sum function? Well, nothing interesting is going to happen. You're going to get the zero function. But if you take the iota function, that is the one function and take its sum, its sum is going to be our tow the number of divisors. And you can keep on going, but it's going to get complicated on this side. I kind of want to backtrack and say what happened when we started with the identity function and took its sum function that turned out to be sigma. A couple more such examples. How about if I take oh remember that uh epsilon guy the one that goes blip and then dies right. So what happens if I take it sum function? Well, let us think. If I have a number n and I want to plug it in here, I just have to take the divisor of n and keep plugging them into epsilon. But this thing is going to die after I plug in one. So there's going to be one and then zeros al together. So no matter what n I plug in here, overall I'm just going to get one. So the sum function of the epsilon is iota the constant function. The sum function of iota is toao. So we are getting a chain of functions. So epsilon by this um sum function goes to the constant function one which eventually goes to tow. All right. Where is the raffle function? We forgot about it. It is here creeping on us. What happens if I take the sum function of the raffle function and you're like the raffle function is already complicated and now you're asking me to take the sum function. Am I asking you to complicate or to simplify the situation? So let us think let let's take it slow. So what's the sum function of the raffle function at six? All right, I have to keep taking the divisor of six, feeding them into the raffle function and adding up. So raffle of one plus raffle of two plus raffle of three plus raffle of six. Hold on. Haven't we seen this before? So what this means is that I am adding up how many tickets have the divisor of six written on them. How much was that? That was exactly six. That's how the raffle function was defined to start. So this is supposed to be six. I don't even have to write this. I plug in six, I have to output six. I plug in n, I have to output n because this is really what the definition of the raffle function was. The sum of the number of tickets on which divisor of n is written is n. But which function when you plug into it n outputs n? That's the identity function. So we have another chain of functions. The raffle function was really defined in a very bizarre way implicit way. So that its sum is the identity function. And then if I take the sum of the identity function, we already saw this earlier. That's the sigma function. The the the sum of the divisor of a number. Okay. So we have some handle on our raffle function. its sum function is the identity. So the question is can I go back if you give me the sum function of something can I find the original function because that will be our raffle function. So we somehow have to invert which operation it's not the ordinary multiplication but the dishlay product or the dishlay convolution. So let's uh let's do it. So we are back to our multiplication table but the new one. So remember that our operation is the dirishle product. Multiplying by zero I'm getting the zero function. Multiplying by one of the iota function. We already saw that this will be the sum function of f. So that's a pretty important thing. But I want to get back to f. I want to multiply by something so that I would get f. Just like in our usual ordinary multiplication, the zero function plays the role of the zero number. You multiply by the zero number, you're dead. You get zero. But if you multiply by one, you get yourself back. Right? So we are looking for what place what functions play the roles of zero and one in our new setup. The zero is obvious is the same zero. But the one function is not anymore the one in that setup. It turns out it is this epsilon due the blip function. Why? So if you derishlay a function with the epsilon at n. So what is this? I have to start taking divisor of n and feeding them into f and epsilon. But epsilon is going to kill all of them except until if I plug in one there. So the only thing that will survive out of this is f of n * epsilon of 1. So this guy will be one. So you're going to get f of n. Oh, that is my function. So if I dearishly f with the epsilon blip function, I'm going to get f back. So who plays the role of one in our new setup? >> The blip. >> The blip function. That's right. This is our one. And it is important to understand these rules so that I know now how to invert function. For instance, going back to middle school, right? What is the inverse of five? And you're going to ask me, well, with respect to which operation? Addition or multiplication? Let's do multiplication. So, what's the inverse of five? B, what do you think? >> I don't know. A fifth. >> A fifth. 1/5. I don't like 1/5 because it involves division, but it is the correct thing. Why? Because if I multiply five and this 1/5 business I get the number one which is the one in this setup. Okay. So if I want to find an inverse dearishly inverse of a function it means that when I multiply that inverse with f what should I get? I should get the blip function. So f inverse in this setup would be such a function that if I derishlay product with f I'm going to get the epsilon. And why am I so interested in this? Mathematically speaking of course we're interested. We want to know what the inverses are. But in our setup I had information very scarse information about the raffle function. All I knew is that its sum function as we just discovered is the identity function. So I somehow want to invert the situation. But what was the sum function? The sum function meant I take my raffle and dirishlate with the iota function. Right? So we have this equation here. The dirishle product of our raffle function with the constant one function is identity function. We know those two functions very well. There's nothing complicated about them. A middle schooler would know both of the functions. But how do I find this raffle? So let's go back to elementary school >> just to understand the ideas. You went to a different elementary school to me but >> and well okay suppose we are trying to solve an equation like this x * 5 is equal to 7. So how I'm going to find x? You're going to tell me divide by five and I'm going to say hold on I don't have division here. I just have multiplication. So how do I get rid of this five on the left? I will multiply both sides by the inverse of five. So you may think this is silly what I'm doing because everyone knows it. But keep in mind that we are going to take those ideas three levels higher to our raffle function. So we really need to understand them. So I'm multiplying by the inverse of five here. Then what I'm going to do is I will switch parentheses. Which property of multiplication for numbers allows me to switch parentheses? That is associivity. So keep that in mind because we need to have associivity for our durishly product or else this whole argument is going to go to pieces. And then on the right hand side I'm going to have 7 * 5 inverse. Yes, I know this is 7 fths, but just forget about that for now. Now, this guy here is our promised one. And when I multiply those, I get x. And then you're going to get your 7 fths. So that's the idea. Can we replicate this on our raffle function? Let's try. So what did we have the raffle function deish slay with the one function is the identity right I need to find the derishly inverse of the one function so uh how do I find that Okay, so the last big stretch here is to find the girishlay inverse of the one constant function. All right, that's not the reciprocal or anything crazy like this. It's even more crazy. It's the deerishlay inverse. Mhm. Let's let's give it a name. I'm just going to call it mu for Mobius because apparently he introduced it. You can check on the history. Uh so what do I want for this mobious function to do? I want it when I dearish it with the one function to get but that's the wrong one to get our blip function because it's the blip function that plays the role of one in our new world. Okay, we're going to do a little bit of reverse engineering and they'll give you the formula. the formula is not so bad but if I give it to you in the beginning um it will just seem very artificial. So just like for the raffle function we're going to do something similar when I uh take the durishlay product with the iota function that's actually simplified to the sum function of mu. So we are really trying to find which function has some function the blip function. What does this mean? Starting from one, if I plug in one on both sides, I should get one cuz that's what the blip function tells me. But what is this? This is just mu of one. Ah, okay. Okay. Okay, that's reasonable. Mu of one is one. And that's actually what most multiplicity functions do anyway. So, I'm fine. Let's try two. So, that should be epsilon of two. But that's already dead. As a matter of fact, from now on, I have to be getting zeros. Okay. Well, what's this? This is mu of 1 plus mu of two because these are the two divisor of two. So overall this should be zero. Hold on. But I know that mu of 1 is one. How much is left for mu of two? -1. Our first negative number. Aha. So some multiplicative functions output negative numbers. That's okay. So mu of two is -2. >> Not stopping. Oh negative one. Sorry. Sorry, I got carried away. How about mu of three? Mu of three. I'm going to carry the same absolute idea here. Epsilon of three, that's zero. So, mu of one plus mu of three is zero. This guy is one. This better be negative 1. So, what do you guys think now? Mu of anything else is going to be negative one. No, no, no, no, no, no. Because see what with this argument we can show is what happens to prime numbers because two and three were prime. They didn't have many divisor. So this has to be the blip of p which is zero. On this side we get mu of one. Mu of p must be zero. So what we showed is that mu of prime numbers is -1. Not just mu of anything. So that's prime. But now you're going to say, "Hold on. How about six? Six is not prime." Okay. So what is mu of six? All right. So we're just backtracking into I still have to get zero here. Mu of 1 plus mu of two. You've seen me writing similar sums before. So this should become kind of automatic by now. Mu of one is one. Oh, we just found those two. They are negative ones. How much is left for mu of six to uh compensate one? Uh-oh. This is going to get complicated. No, no, not so bad. So, actually what the same argument shows is that if you have two different prime numbers like two and three and take their product, this is going to be one. And it makes perfect sense because I'm expecting it to be the product of those two guys. And this was negative one negative. All right, this is working. Okay, one more example and then I'll give you the formula for homework. How about a four, right? So, mu of four. All right, that should be dead. What are the divisor of four? One, two, four. Right, this should be zero. This guy is one. This guy is negative one. How much is left for mu of four dead? It's zero. What do you think will mu of eight be? If I were doing this with eight, all I had to do is add another mu of eight. But there is no nothing for it left. It still has to be zero. What kind of a function is this? Okay. Definition of the Mobius function the dearishly inverse of the iota function. So Mobius of attains really only three values. So it's not anymore the blip function. It's uh kind of blippy up and down. >> Double blip. >> Double blip. One zero. And here I'm going to be dubious. It's either one or minus one. So it will be one when n is one. It will be -1 to the k depending on how many prime divisor distinct it has. But it cannot have the square of any prime divisor. So n has to be literally just a product of k distinct primes. Period. Eight and four were bad because they had the same prime raised to a higher power. Two squared was dividing them. So these numbers here are called San Francisco primes. No, I'm just kidding. Square of three numbers. There is no square that divides them except for one. That's it. Okay. Zero. If n is not a San Francisco number, it's not square free number. So in other words, if sum prime squared divides n is a divisor that then we're just going to die. Now this is for homework. It's a great exercise. Try it out. And mu, what kind of a function would mu be? Where is my diagram? Mu is going to be also just multiplicative, not strongly multiplicative. You know that because mu 4 if it was strongly multiplicative it would have to split like this but those guys are negative one negative one while this one is dead is not going to work. So it's not strongly multiplicative but that's okay. Multiplicative is really our land here. Okay. >> Okay. Now let's finish the story. Why do they need the mobius function to start with? because we wanted to invert the one function. Why did I want to invert the one function? Going back to the raffle function. So the sum function of the raffle function is the identity. This was the original convoluted weird in disguise definition of the raffle function. Okay. But we know what sum function is. it becomes or can be encoded as the dirishle product of any function with the iota function. So that has to be the identity. Now here this becomes our equation the equation for x that we are trying to find. So I'm trying to solve for this raffle. Okay. What properties does the dirishle product have? I'm going to list them for you and luckily they correspond to what you used from elementary school about multiplication. So the dirishle product is everything you want it to be. It is commutative. So if you have f dish g you can flip-flop those no problem. It acts like regular multiplication. It is also associative. If you have three functions and bother to take the durishlay product, you can move parentheses freely around and you can therefore write triple products. Doesn't matter which ones you multiply first and you can swap them around. That's for homework. A little bit boring, but you know, nothing too complicated. So with this in mind, we just found that the inverse of the one function was our new player, Mobius. Okay. Am I ready to get rid of this? Absolutely. So the nitty gritty, is that the expression? Details here go like this. Multiply both sides dishly multiply them by mu. I can put mu wherever I want on the left or on the right. Then change the parenthesis. Okay, so that's still this. Then this guy because they are inverses of each other will be the bleep function epsilon which plays the role of one. But what happens when I dish with the epsilon function? It plays the role of one. I'm going to get my original function. So from here we draw the conclusion that the raffle function is the mobius function dishlate with the identity function. And in fact this is a special example of something called the Mobius inversion formula because it uses the Mobius function. Okay. But what is this good for? It is a direct formula for the raffle function. But I don't care about the exact formula. I care that it exists. Why? Because multiplicative is contagious. So that's another theorem that you may prove on the side. And it says the following. If two functions f and g are multiplicative, so they are in somewhere here. They could be even strongly multiplicative. If I take their dirishle product that's going to be some function where do you think that dishlay product will be this new function? It will still be in multiplicative land and that's power. If you know that a function is multiplicative you can find what it is equal to a direct formula to work with very easily. And I'll show you on the next and last sheet of paper. All right. >> So right here what we see is the following. Identity is not just multiplicative. It's strongly multiplicative. But do I care about that? Do I seem to care? I don't. It's just multiplicative. Mu as a homework I gave you here is also multiplicative. then the product of them will be multiplicative which implies that our mysterious raffle function is indeed in multiplicative land. Let's find what function that is found. [Music] Okay, we start now with the huge advantage that the raffle function is multiplicative that gives us the possibility to split the raffle function onto the prime powers immediately. So if I see to it any n and I write the prime power decomposition of m p1 to the a1 p2 to the a2 blah blah p k to the a k because those prime powers are pairwise co-prime multiplicative kicks in and I can split this into the product of what the raffle function is doing on prime. powers. But guess what? We already had a formula like this from earlier. We found this when we were doing raffle of 2 48 and we noticed it. So what's the formula for each of those prime powers? I'm going to write it here on the side and then we'll use it. Take the full power and subtract from it the previous power. Okay. Putting this together, I am going to write each of those powers and subtract from it the previous power. This may look intimidating from the beginning, but hold your horses. It's still a direct formula and we'll find perhaps even easier version of it. Okay. Now you are going to be shocked when I tell you I'm going to simplify this formula not by factoring the smaller power but by over factoring the larger one. I mean who in their right mind is doing that cuz I'm going to end up with fractions. Well hold on hold your horses. P to the M. If I factor it all I have from it left is one. What am I left with here? Well, when I multiply those two, I should get P to the M minus one. So, I'm getting this fraction. Okay, just let's try it here. So, I'm going to over factor and I'm just going to do this in the very beginning. Put them together. All of those prime powers, the larger ones. What's left from the first one? I just have 1 - one over P1. from the second one 1 - 1 / p2. Keep on going. 1 - 1 / pk. But what is this? This is my original number n because I have all of its particles here. So I get the following very nice formula for the raffle function. It is the original number n times 1 minus the reciprocal of its prime divisor all multiplied. That's it. Some of you may already start recognizing this is a formula of another famous function called the oiler toion function. and it is that is precisely equal from a different direction to that oiler function. So it turns out that our raffle function was nothing or nothing less than the oiler function and the way it was given to us in disguise was the following. They basically told us that the sum function of the oiler function is the identity. And of course in the beginning we did not know any of this. But now we have the full power to work with this raffle function. Now before I show you some examples what is the oiler function? The oiler function is defined in a way that is looks like exactly the opposite to the raffle function. What is the oiler function of n? It is the number of numbers which means natural numbers between one and n possibly inclusive that are co-prime within. All right. What does this mean? Let's say five of five. Well, what numbers from one to five are relatively prime to five? I mean, everything except for five because five is prime. So, that would be four. And of course, you recognize that that's 5 minus one, which was our raffle function of five. That shouldn't be a surprise. Okay. Uh what is five of six? All right. So, what from 1 to six are relatively prime to six? Well, two is not, three is not, six is not, four is not. So, just one and five. So, this should be two. Is this what the raffle function would have given us? Yeah. Um, the raffle function of six, I can split it. I don't have to go all the way to this formula. I can just split it on raffle of two, raffle of three because it's multiplicative. Raffle of two, that's 2 - 1, one. Raffle of three, that's 3 - one, two. This is working. Okay. So, but it just gives me a headache, a mild headache. So, the ruffle function is defined using just divisors of n something that truly can divide n. The oiler function is defined using relatively prime numbers to n. And then there is all of this array of other numbers third numbers that are neither divisor of n nor relatively prime to n. How come the ravel function should be equal to the oiler function? Well, we have the proof. We saw it. You may try to find another proof. But I think we need to answer Brady's question about 42. >> Yes. So Brady wants to find out if 42 would be written on any ticket and if yes on how many tickets so he can get them for his friends. So let's go for it. Raffle of 42. This should be easy peasy now because we split into its prime power factorization which happens to be products of primes. Let's do it two different ways because I know that the raffle now is multiplicative. I can split it into a product of its values on those. These are primes. So I just lower them down by one. 1 2 6. So it looks like it's 12. Let's try differently. >> So there are 12 tickets with number 42 written on it. >> Yeah. Let's look at this formula here. Would that formula also give us the same answer? So, I would have to put the number 42 and then do some stupid things with these fractions. Okay. Well, um you know what? I am really lazy. I don't want to deal with those fractions. So, I'm going to take two from here and multiply it by this whole factor. Three from here multiply. And seven from here, multiply. And there will be nothing left out of 42. So when I multiply by 2, I'm going to get 2 - 1. When I multiply by 3, 3 - 1, 7 - 1. And guess what? That is precisely what we got before. Shall we try one last example? >> Okay. >> What is your most preferred year? This year, 2024, last year or next year? I >> I like this year. this year. Okay, >> turning around. >> You want another piece? I've got one more piece. >> Oh, what? You want another one? There you go. Show me 204. Yeah. >> 2024. [Music] You want to know how many tickets have this number written on them? Okay, let's do it. What do I need to know about 204? >> Prime factorization. Brad, you learned so fast. Now, uh, what is it? I mean, it's divisible by two. Is it divisible by four? And that 24 pretty much tells me. How about eight? Pretty much I know because of that. So, this is going to be 2 cubed. And when I divide by that, it's still going to be. So, I'm going to reach from my calculator. Where's my calculator? There is my calculator. So, let's do it. 2024 /ed by 8. 253. Is this prime? >> It's primeish. >> Primeish. >> Well, let's see. It's definitely not divisible by two. Not divisible by three. Not divisible by seven. Nope, it's not divisible by seven. It's divisible by 11. Let's try by 11. Well, there was this nice criteria of plus minus the digits of a number. So 2 minus 5 + 3 that's zero. That's divisible by 11. Let's try divide by 11. 23 and 23 is prime. So we are on a roll. So let's just split it because the raffle is multiplicative. Okay, the prime numbers are easy to deal with. I'll just lower them by one. 11 becomes 10. 23 becomes 22. This guy, if you remember our formula, I will take have to take the full power and subtract the previous power. So, this will be and I'm sure we found it like several times before. Okay. So, what's that? 880 tickets. Have that. That's a prolific number. Yeah. And so Brady, you were worried at some point during this talk that some number may fail to be written. Do you think there is such a number? >> I don't. >> No. Because look at this formula. This formula first of all it has to give you a natural number no matter what. We know that those primes will be killed after cancelled after you multiply through. Can this be zero? No. There is no way this this is zero. So the original way that this problem was given to me when I was training on the Bulgarian team for the International Math Olympiad was they gave us this convoluted description of the raffle function and they said prove that every number can be is written on at least one ticket but they didn't tell you how many. So you had to solve this larger problem of actually finding what the function is before you can answer this. But how do you find what the function is? You further enlarge the problem to the multiplicative land. Talk about properties there. the blip function, the mobius function, dirishlay inverses, dishlay products and then put everything together and come back eventually. What did we use that for anyways to show that the raffle function is multiplicative? That's all I cared for. Once I knew this, we were home free. we can split everything on its uh building blocks which are the prime powers and we could kill the problem in no time. >> So you you did this during the math olympiadi as a training for the math olympiadi. >> How old were you? >> Uh maybe 10th grade. Yeah, it's not that complicated if if you know take it piece by piece and of course if your elementary education in math is pretty strong. Yeah. How come you haven't done this on number file until now? >> Well, you now know it is a technical subject. It involves a progression of many many steps and enlarging the problem several times before you can solve the bigger issue, the bigger problem and come back. So, I just want you to try some simpler things before I graduate to this very complicated topic. Okay, when I saw your notes there, I thought this is going to be quite a quick one. Wow. Well, if you made it this far, I'm guessing you might like videos about really long proofs. And you might also enjoy videos with Zvezda here. So, if you have a look at the links below, I've put playlists and links to more stuff just like this. More Zvezda videos, more long proofs. Knock yourself out. the diameter of this. We can work out the diameter of this and then we've got the radius. So, how can we do that? This is epic.
