# Unexpected Shapes (Part 1) - Numberphile

Источник: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wKV0GYvR2X8
Канал: Numberphile

We'll start very slowly, but don't worry, we'll speed up in a moment. Strip of paper, and I glue the ends into a loop, a straight loop, and I cut it along the center line. Well, what's going to happen? Well, everyone can guess what's going to happen. In fact, everyone knows with total conviction what's going to happen. It splits into two halves. Next, we're going to make the famous object movie strip. Now, that's one twist. 180° and glue the ends and this is the well no object which has only one face and so forth. What's going to happen if we cut this along the center line and unlike the previous case it does not fall into two pieces. Now, so far so good. And people might say, oh, I've already done that and so forth and it's in books. But even professional mathematicians often don't realize how many twists there are in this resulting object. In this configuration, you see all the twists are in the upper half of the of the strip and the lower half has no twist. Okay, let's count the number of twists that this object has. In order to do so, I'm going to apply the violence and I'm not going to move. cutting lower half and start untwisting the top. One, still twisted obviously. Two. Three. It's slight but still twisted. Four. And finally, it's straight. That's not what I wanted to show you. What I wanted to show you is something different. What we would like to do is to glue together those strips. For example, that's straight against straight. Glue at the right angles to each other. And what we are going to do is cut this kind of object all the way around the center line. all the way around the center line. Not only straight ones, but also we'd like to glue movie strips. So there are four possibilities. Straight against straight, straight against mov. And now you're thinking, well, Tadashi can't count because there only three cases. But actually there are four because when you glue Mubius against Mubius, those two movie strips can be of the same karity. That is they might be twisted in the same direction or they can have opposite karities that is they are twisted on opposite cases. A priority maybe they'll produce different results. So we have to be careful. Straight again. Straight. Here is a cross. And I glue the ends. That's one straight strip for us. And then the other strip like so. By the way, a little bit of engineering advice if you want to show this to friends and family. It's very tempting to make the strips u loops and then glue them at right angles, but then it becomes really difficult actually. You have to go in there and glue and it's nasty. So, it's much better to make a cross and then glue the ends by cutting all the way around one center line, all the way around the other center line. Somewhere in the middle, you have to make a cross cut. Yeah. But in order to make the susp suspense last, I'm going to leave the cross cut until the end. So here I started cutting one of the loops all the way along the center line and the other loop along the center line also all the way around but leaving the cross cut until the end here. This is the picture just as we are about to finish cutting. You can see that this was one untwisted loop cut along the center line and this was another untwisted loop cut along the center line. Okay. Now earlier when we had a single untwisted ordinary loop and when we cut it along the center line it just split into two halves. The results of which are visible here. What's going to happen this time? Are you ready? I'm going to cut this. Finish cutting it. Chop. Chop. And what emerges is a flat square. That's funny. Flat square. What happened? Okay. Um, we'll come back to that in a moment. But let's try the next case. Let's try straight against mov. That's a straight strip. And then the other one I'm going to twist once into a movie strip. And by which I mean twist one and then glue the ends. Okay. This object is genuinely different from the previous one. So when I cut this object along the center line like this, center line like this, um, you should produce something hopefully different. Let's try them then. As usual, in order to make the suspense last, I'm going to leave the cross cut until the end. And then now the other loop. Let's cut along the center line. Cut, cut, cut. And then that's the picture that we have as we about to finish cutting. So you can see that this was a straight loop which has been cut along the center line. And that was the move twisted and has been cut along the center line. And this as we say is different from the previous one. Straight again straight because of this twist. Now what's going to happen when I cut finish cutting everything? Are you ready? And finally finish cutting. And what emerges is again a flat square. Well, that was disappointing or interestingly disappointing. I mean, maybe we're getting a flat square every single time. Straight against straight flat square. Straight against movies. Flat square again. Let's now do movies against movies. But now we'll do two movies of opposite karate. That is twisted in opposite ways. Now, if you want to show this off to friends and family, you have to remember that it's opposite. And in order to do so, you have to exercise your short-term memory here. First, let's glue this by twisting this piece clockwise in a right-handed screw fashion and make a move. Yeah. And you have to remember this. So, that's one. In a moment, when I'm about to close the other one, wait, what have I just done? Was it clockwise, anticlockwise? What was it? Well, it was clockwise. So, this time you have to spin it counterclockwise or anticlockwise if you're looking at this from the other side of Atlantic in the left hand screw fashion. And then close the ends, glue the ends together. And that's the other piece. Two movie strips that have opposite that are glued at the right angles to each other. It is a rather beautiful thing. And although this is strictly not necessary from the mathematical point of view, I'm going to reinforce these pieces from the back because that's going to be better for the resulting sculpture later on. And this is uh present for everyone. I cut all the way around one and all the way around the other loop, but leaving the cross cut until the end as usual. Are you ready? So nothing up here, nothing up here. And what rem is a present for all of you? And I finished cutting. I finished cutting. And I told you this is applicable in applied mathematics. What emerges is amazingly a pair of linked hearts. And so you see it is an applicable mathematics as you can see. I mean you can apply it in all sorts of contexts and I hope you'll make good use of it. Now let's understand why we get a flat square. Until now in a silly attempt at theatrics I was leaving the cross cut until the end. A good point of view however good way to think about this is to cut one of the pieces completely around four and finally it's straight. So the object had four twists not two. Where do the extra two twists come from? You know, as I say, we seem to have proved a moment ago that the object should have two twists, but it had four twists.
